=== CHAPTER 1: ATOMS IN MOTION ===
1–1Introduction
This two-year course in physics is presented from the point of view that you, the reader, are going to be a physicist. This is not necessarily the case of course, but that is what every professor in every subject assumes! If you are going to be a physicist, you will have a lot to study: two hundred years of the most rapidly developing field of knowledge that there is. So much knowledge, in fact, that you might think that you cannot learn all of it in four years, and truly you cannot; you will have to go to graduate school too!

Surprisingly enough, in spite of the tremendous amount of work that has been done for all this time it is possible to condense the enormous mass of results to a large extent—that is, to find laws which summarize all our knowledge. Even so, the laws are so hard to grasp that it is unfair to you to start exploring this tremendous subject without some kind of map or outline of the relationship of one part of the subject of science to another. Following these preliminary remarks, the first three chapters will therefore outline the relation of physics to the rest of the sciences, the relations of the sciences to each other, and the meaning of science, to help us develop a “feel” for the subject.

You might ask why we cannot teach physics by just giving the basic laws on page one and then showing how they work in all possible circumstances, as we do in Euclidean geometry, where we state the axioms and then make all sorts of deductions. (So, not satisfied to learn physics in four years, you want to learn it in four minutes?) We cannot do it in this way for two reasons. First, we do not yet know all the basic laws: there is an expanding frontier of ignorance. Second, the correct statement of the laws of physics involves some very unfamiliar ideas which require advanced mathematics for their description. Therefore, one needs a considerable amount of preparatory training even to learn what the words mean. No, it is not possible to do it that way. We can only do it piece by piece.

Each piece, or part, of the whole of nature is always merely an approximation to the complete truth, or the complete truth so far as we know it. In fact, everything we know is only some kind of approximation, because we know that we do not know all the laws as yet. Therefore, things must be learned only to be unlearned again or, more likely, to be corrected.

The principle of science, the definition, almost, is the following: The test of all knowledge is experiment. Experiment is the sole judge of scientific “truth.” But what is the source of knowledge? Where do the laws that are to be tested come from? Experiment, itself, helps to produce these laws, in the sense that it gives us hints. But also needed is imagination to create from these hints the great generalizations—to guess at the wonderful, simple, but very strange patterns beneath them all, and then to experiment to check again whether we have made the right guess. This imagining process is so difficult that there is a division of labor in physics: there are theoretical physicists who imagine, deduce, and guess at new laws, but do not experiment; and then there are experimental physicists who experiment, imagine, deduce, and guess.

We said that the laws of nature are approximate: that we first find the “wrong” ones, and then we find the “right” ones. Now, how can an experiment be “wrong”? First, in a trivial way: if something is wrong with the apparatus that you did not notice. But these things are easily fixed, and checked back and forth. So without snatching at such minor things, how can the results of an experiment be wrong? Only by being inaccurate. For example, the mass of an object never seems to change: a spinning top has the same weight as a still one. So a “law” was invented: mass is constant, independent of speed. That “law” is now found to be incorrect. Mass is found to increase with velocity, but appreciable increases require velocities near that of light. A true law is: if an object moves with a speed of less than one hundred miles a second the mass is constant to within one part in a million. In some such approximate form this is a correct law. So in practice one might think that the new law makes no significant difference. Well, yes and no. For ordinary speeds we can certainly forget it and use the simple constant-mass law as a good approximation. But for high speeds we are wrong, and the higher the speed, the more wrong we are.

Finally, and most interesting, philosophically we are completely wrong with the approximate law. Our entire picture of the world has to be altered even though the mass changes only by a little bit. This is a very peculiar thing about the philosophy, or the ideas, behind the laws. Even a very small effect sometimes requires profound changes in our ideas.

Now, what should we teach first? Should we teach the correct but unfamiliar law with its strange and difficult conceptual ideas, for example the theory of relativity, four-dimensional space-time, and so on? Or should we first teach the simple “constant-mass” law, which is only approximate, but does not involve such difficult ideas? The first is more exciting, more wonderful, and more fun, but the second is easier to get at first, and is a first step to a real understanding of the first idea. This point arises again and again in teaching physics. At different times we shall have to resolve it in different ways, but at each stage it is worth learning what is now known, how accurate it is, how it fits into everything else, and how it may be changed when we learn more.

Let us now proceed with our outline, or general map, of our understanding of science today (in particular, physics, but also of other sciences on the periphery), so that when we later concentrate on some particular point we will have some idea of the background, why that particular point is interesting, and how it fits into the big structure. So, what is our overall picture of the world?

1–2Matter is made of atoms
If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only one sentence passed on to the next generations of creatures, what statement would contain the most information in the fewest words? I believe it is the atomic hypothesis (or the atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it) that all things are made of atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another. In that one sentence, you will see, there is an enormous amount of information about the world, if just a little imagination and thinking are applied.


Figure 1–1
To illustrate the power of the atomic idea, suppose that we have a drop of water a quarter of an inch on the side. If we look at it very closely we see nothing but water—smooth, continuous water. Even if we magnify it with the best optical microscope available—roughly two thousand times—then the water drop will be roughly forty feet across, about as big as a large room, and if we looked rather closely, we would still see relatively smooth water—but here and there small football-shaped things swimming back and forth. Very interesting. These are paramecia. You may stop at this point and get so curious about the paramecia with their wiggling cilia and twisting bodies that you go no further, except perhaps to magnify the paramecia still more and see inside. This, of course, is a subject for biology, but for the present we pass on and look still more closely at the water material itself, magnifying it two thousand times again. Now the drop of water extends about fifteen miles across, and if we look very closely at it we see a kind of teeming, something which no longer has a smooth appearance—it looks something like a crowd at a football game as seen from a very great distance. In order to see what this teeming is about, we will magnify it another two hundred and fifty times and we will see something similar to what is shown in Fig. 1–1. This is a picture of water magnified a billion times, but idealized in several ways. In the first place, the particles are drawn in a simple manner with sharp edges, which is inaccurate. Secondly, for simplicity, they are sketched almost schematically in a two-dimensional arrangement, but of course they are moving around in three dimensions. Notice that there are two kinds of “blobs” or circles to represent the atoms of oxygen (black) and hydrogen (white), and that each oxygen has two hydrogens tied to it. (Each little group of an oxygen with its two hydrogens is called a molecule.) The picture is idealized further in that the real particles in nature are continually jiggling and bouncing, turning and twisting around one another. You will have to imagine this as a dynamic rather than a static picture. Another thing that cannot be illustrated in a drawing is the fact that the particles are “stuck together”—that they attract each other, this one pulled by that one, etc. The whole group is “glued together,” so to speak. On the other hand, the particles do not squeeze through each other. If you try to squeeze two of them too close together, they repel.

The atoms are 1
 or 2×10−8
 cm in radius. Now 10−8
 cm is called an angstrom (just as another name), so we say they are 1 or 2 angstroms (Å) in radius. Another way to remember their size is this: if an apple is magnified to the size of the earth, then the atoms in the apple are approximately the size of the original apple.

Now imagine this great drop of water with all of these jiggling particles stuck together and tagging along with each other. The water keeps its volume; it does not fall apart, because of the attraction of the molecules for each other. If the drop is on a slope, where it can move from one place to another, the water will flow, but it does not just disappear—things do not just fly apart—because of the molecular attraction. Now the jiggling motion is what we represent as heat: when we increase the temperature, we increase the motion. If we heat the water, the jiggling increases and the volume between the atoms increases, and if the heating continues there comes a time when the pull between the molecules is not enough to hold them together and they do fly apart and become separated from one another. Of course, this is how we manufacture steam out of water—by increasing the temperature; the particles fly apart because of the increased motion.


Figure 1–2
In Fig. 1–2 we have a picture of steam. This picture of steam fails in one respect: at ordinary atmospheric pressure there certainly would not be as many as three water molecules in this figure. Most squares this size would contain none—but we accidentally have two and a half or three in the picture (just so it would not be completely blank). Now in the case of steam we see the characteristic molecules more clearly than in the case of water. For simplicity, the molecules are drawn so that there is a 120∘
 angle between the hydrogen atoms. In actual fact the angle is 105∘3′
, and the distance between the center of a hydrogen and the center of the oxygen is 0.957 Å, so we know this molecule very well.

Let us see what some of the properties of steam vapor or any other gas are. The molecules, being separated from one another, will bounce against the walls. Imagine a room with a number of tennis balls (a hundred or so) bouncing around in perpetual motion. When they bombard the wall, this pushes the wall away. (Of course we would have to push the wall back.) This means that the gas exerts a jittery force which our coarse senses (not being ourselves magnified a billion times) feel only as an average push. In order to confine a gas we must apply a pressure. Figure 1–3 shows a standard vessel for holding gases (used in all textbooks), a cylinder with a piston in it. Now, it makes no difference what the shapes of water molecules are, so for simplicity we shall draw them as tennis balls or little dots. These things are in perpetual motion in all directions. So many of them are hitting the top piston all the time that to keep it from being patiently knocked out of the tank by this continuous banging, we shall have to hold the piston down by a certain force, which we call the pressure (really, the pressure times the area is the force). Clearly, the force is proportional to the area, for if we increase the area but keep the number of molecules per cubic centimeter the same, we increase the number of collisions with the piston in the same proportion as the area was increased.


Figure 1–3
Now let us put twice as many molecules in this tank, so as to double the density, and let them have the same speed, i.e., the same temperature. Then, to a close approximation, the number of collisions will be doubled, and since each will be just as “energetic” as before, the pressure is proportional to the density. If we consider the true nature of the forces between the atoms, we would expect a slight decrease in pressure because of the attraction between the atoms, and a slight increase because of the finite volume they occupy. Nevertheless, to an excellent approximation, if the density is low enough that there are not many atoms, the pressure is proportional to the density.

We can also see something else: If we increase the temperature without changing the density of the gas, i.e., if we increase the speed of the atoms, what is going to happen to the pressure? Well, the atoms hit harder because they are moving faster, and in addition they hit more often, so the pressure increases. You see how simple the ideas of atomic theory are.

Let us consider another situation. Suppose that the piston moves inward, so that the atoms are slowly compressed into a smaller space. What happens when an atom hits the moving piston? Evidently it picks up speed from the collision. You can try it by bouncing a ping-pong ball from a forward-moving paddle, for example, and you will find that it comes off with more speed than that with which it struck. (Special example: if an atom happens to be standing still and the piston hits it, it will certainly move.) So the atoms are “hotter” when they come away from the piston than they were before they struck it. Therefore all the atoms which are in the vessel will have picked up speed. This means that when we compress a gas slowly, the temperature of the gas increases. So, under slow compression, a gas will increase in temperature, and under slow expansion it will decrease in temperature.


Figure 1–4
We now return to our drop of water and look in another direction. Suppose that we decrease the temperature of our drop of water. Suppose that the jiggling of the molecules of the atoms in the water is steadily decreasing. We know that there are forces of attraction between the atoms, so that after a while they will not be able to jiggle so well. What will happen at very low temperatures is indicated in Fig. 1–4: the molecules lock into a new pattern which is ice. This particular schematic diagram of ice is wrong because it is in two dimensions, but it is right qualitatively. The interesting point is that the material has a definite place for every atom, and you can easily appreciate that if somehow or other we were to hold all the atoms at one end of the drop in a certain arrangement, each atom in a certain place, then because of the structure of interconnections, which is rigid, the other end miles away (at our magnified scale) will have a definite location. So if we hold a needle of ice at one end, the other end resists our pushing it aside, unlike the case of water, in which the structure is broken down because of the increased jiggling so that the atoms all move around in different ways. The difference between solids and liquids is, then, that in a solid the atoms are arranged in some kind of an array, called a crystalline array, and they do not have a random position at long distances; the position of the atoms on one side of the crystal is determined by that of other atoms millions of atoms away on the other side of the crystal. Figure 1–4 is an invented arrangement for ice, and although it contains many of the correct features of ice, it is not the true arrangement. One of the correct features is that there is a part of the symmetry that is hexagonal. You can see that if we turn the picture around an axis by 60∘
, the picture returns to itself. So there is a symmetry in the ice which accounts for the six-sided appearance of snowflakes. Another thing we can see from Fig. 1–4 is why ice shrinks when it melts. The particular crystal pattern of ice shown here has many “holes” in it, as does the true ice structure. When the organization breaks down, these holes can be occupied by molecules. Most simple substances, with the exception of water and type metal, expand upon melting, because the atoms are closely packed in the solid crystal and upon melting need more room to jiggle around, but an open structure collapses, as in the case of water.

Now although ice has a “rigid” crystalline form, its temperature can change—ice has heat. If we wish, we can change the amount of heat. What is the heat in the case of ice? The atoms are not standing still. They are jiggling and vibrating. So even though there is a definite order to the crystal—a definite structure—all of the atoms are vibrating “in place.” As we increase the temperature, they vibrate with greater and greater amplitude, until they shake themselves out of place. We call this melting. As we decrease the temperature, the vibration decreases and decreases until, at absolute zero, there is a minimum amount of vibration that the atoms can have, but not zero. This minimum amount of motion that atoms can have is not enough to melt a substance, with one exception: helium. Helium merely decreases the atomic motions as much as it can, but even at absolute zero there is still enough motion to keep it from freezing. Helium, even at absolute zero, does not freeze, unless the pressure is made so great as to make the atoms squash together. If we increase the pressure, we can make it solidify.

1–3Atomic processes

Figure 1–5
So much for the description of solids, liquids, and gases from the atomic point of view. However, the atomic hypothesis also describes processes, and so we shall now look at a number of processes from an atomic standpoint. The first process that we shall look at is associated with the surface of the water. What happens at the surface of the water? We shall now make the picture more complicated—and more realistic—by imagining that the surface is in air. Figure 1–5 shows the surface of water in air. We see the water molecules as before, forming a body of liquid water, but now we also see the surface of the water. Above the surface we find a number of things: First of all there are water molecules, as in steam. This is water vapor, which is always found above liquid water. (There is an equilibrium between the steam vapor and the water which will be described later.) In addition we find some other molecules—here two oxygen atoms stuck together by themselves, forming an oxygen molecule, there two nitrogen atoms also stuck together to make a nitrogen molecule. Air consists almost entirely of nitrogen, oxygen, some water vapor, and lesser amounts of carbon dioxide, argon, and other things. So above the water surface is the air, a gas, containing some water vapor. Now what is happening in this picture? The molecules in the water are always jiggling around. From time to time, one on the surface happens to be hit a little harder than usual, and gets knocked away. It is hard to see that happening in the picture because it is a still picture. But we can imagine that one molecule near the surface has just been hit and is flying out, or perhaps another one has been hit and is flying out. Thus, molecule by molecule, the water disappears—it evaporates. But if we close the vessel above, after a while we shall find a large number of molecules of water amongst the air molecules. From time to time, one of these vapor molecules comes flying down to the water and gets stuck again. So we see that what looks like a dead, uninteresting thing—a glass of water with a cover, that has been sitting there for perhaps twenty years—really contains a dynamic and interesting phenomenon which is going on all the time. To our eyes, our crude eyes, nothing is changing, but if we could see it a billion times magnified, we would see that from its own point of view it is always changing: molecules are leaving the surface, molecules are coming back.

Why do we see no change? Because just as many molecules are leaving as are coming back! In the long run “nothing happens.” If we then take the top of the vessel off and blow the moist air away, replacing it with dry air, then the number of molecules leaving is just the same as it was before, because this depends on the jiggling of the water, but the number coming back is greatly reduced because there are so many fewer water molecules above the water. Therefore there are more going out than coming in, and the water evaporates. Hence, if you wish to evaporate water turn on the fan!

Here is something else: Which molecules leave? When a molecule leaves it is due to an accidental, extra accumulation of a little bit more than ordinary energy, which it needs if it is to break away from the attractions of its neighbors. Therefore, since those that leave have more energy than the average, the ones that are left have less average motion than they had before. So the liquid gradually cools if it evaporates. Of course, when a molecule of vapor comes from the air to the water below there is a sudden great attraction as the molecule approaches the surface. This speeds up the incoming molecule and results in generation of heat. So when they leave they take away heat; when they come back they generate heat. Of course when there is no net evaporation the result is nothing—the water is not changing temperature. If we blow on the water so as to maintain a continuous preponderance in the number evaporating, then the water is cooled. Hence, blow on soup to cool it!

Of course you should realize that the processes just described are more complicated than we have indicated. Not only does the water go into the air, but also, from time to time, one of the oxygen or nitrogen molecules will come in and “get lost” in the mass of water molecules, and work its way into the water. Thus the air dissolves in the water; oxygen and nitrogen molecules will work their way into the water and the water will contain air. If we suddenly take the air away from the vessel, then the air molecules will leave more rapidly than they come in, and in doing so will make bubbles. This is very bad for divers, as you may know.


Figure 1–6
 
Figure 1–7
Now we go on to another process. In Fig. 1–6 we see, from an atomic point of view, a solid dissolving in water. If we put a crystal of salt in the water, what will happen? Salt is a solid, a crystal, an organized arrangement of “salt atoms.” Figure 1–7 is an illustration of the three-dimensional structure of common salt, sodium chloride. Strictly speaking, the crystal is not made of atoms, but of what we call ions. An ion is an atom which either has a few extra electrons or has lost a few electrons. In a salt crystal we find chlorine ions (chlorine atoms with an extra electron) and sodium ions (sodium atoms with one electron missing). The ions all stick together by electrical attraction in the solid salt, but when we put them in the water we find, because of the attractions of the negative oxygen and positive hydrogen for the ions, that some of the ions jiggle loose. In Fig. 1–6 we see a chlorine ion getting loose, and other atoms floating in the water in the form of ions. This picture was made with some care. Notice, for example, that the hydrogen ends of the water molecules are more likely to be near the chlorine ion, while near the sodium ion we are more likely to find the oxygen end, because the sodium is positive and the oxygen end of the water is negative, and they attract electrically. Can we tell from this picture whether the salt is dissolving in water or crystallizing out of water? Of course we cannot tell, because while some of the atoms are leaving the crystal other atoms are rejoining it. The process is a dynamic one, just as in the case of evaporation, and it depends on whether there is more or less salt in the water than the amount needed for equilibrium. By equilibrium we mean that situation in which the rate at which atoms are leaving just matches the rate at which they are coming back. If there is almost no salt in the water, more atoms leave than return, and the salt dissolves. If, on the other hand, there are too many “salt atoms,” more return than leave, and the salt is crystallizing.

In passing, we mention that the concept of a molecule of a substance is only approximate and exists only for a certain class of substances. It is clear in the case of water that the three atoms are actually stuck together. It is not so clear in the case of sodium chloride in the solid. There is just an arrangement of sodium and chlorine ions in a cubic pattern. There is no natural way to group them as “molecules of salt.”

Returning to our discussion of solution and precipitation, if we increase the temperature of the salt solution, then the rate at which atoms are taken away is increased, and so is the rate at which atoms are brought back. It turns out to be very difficult, in general, to predict which way it is going to go, whether more or less of the solid will dissolve. Most substances dissolve more, but some substances dissolve less, as the temperature increases.

1–4Chemical reactions
In all of the processes which have been described so far, the atoms and the ions have not changed partners, but of course there are circumstances in which the atoms do change combinations, forming new molecules. This is illustrated in Fig. 1–8. A process in which the rearrangement of the atomic partners occurs is what we call a chemical reaction. The other processes so far described are called physical processes, but there is no sharp distinction between the two. (Nature does not care what we call it, she just keeps on doing it.) This figure is supposed to represent carbon burning in oxygen. In the case of oxygen, two oxygen atoms stick together very strongly. (Why do not three or even four stick together? That is one of the very peculiar characteristics of such atomic processes. Atoms are very special: they like certain particular partners, certain particular directions, and so on. It is the job of physics to analyze why each one wants what it wants. At any rate, two oxygen atoms form, saturated and happy, a molecule.)


Figure 1–8
The carbon atoms are supposed to be in a solid crystal (which could be graphite or diamond2). Now, for example, one of the oxygen molecules can come over to the carbon, and each atom can pick up a carbon atom and go flying off in a new combination—“carbon-oxygen”—which is a molecule of the gas called carbon monoxide. It is given the chemical name CO. It is very simple: the letters “CO” are practically a picture of that molecule. But carbon attracts oxygen much more than oxygen attracts oxygen or carbon attracts carbon. Therefore in this process the oxygen may arrive with only a little energy, but the oxygen and carbon will snap together with a tremendous vengeance and commotion, and everything near them will pick up the energy. A large amount of motion energy, kinetic energy, is thus generated. This of course is burning; we are getting heat from the combination of oxygen and carbon. The heat is ordinarily in the form of the molecular motion of the hot gas, but in certain circumstances it can be so enormous that it generates light. That is how one gets flames.

In addition, the carbon monoxide is not quite satisfied. It is possible for it to attach another oxygen, so that we might have a much more complicated reaction in which the oxygen is combining with the carbon, while at the same time there happens to be a collision with a carbon monoxide molecule. One oxygen atom could attach itself to the CO and ultimately form a molecule, composed of one carbon and two oxygens, which is designated CO2
 and called carbon dioxide. If we burn the carbon with very little oxygen in a very rapid reaction (for example, in an automobile engine, where the explosion is so fast that there is not time for it to make carbon dioxide) a considerable amount of carbon monoxide is formed. In many such rearrangements, a very large amount of energy is released, forming explosions, flames, etc., depending on the reactions. Chemists have studied these arrangements of the atoms, and found that every substance is some type of arrangement of atoms.

To illustrate this idea, let us consider another example. If we go into a field of small violets, we know what “that smell” is. It is some kind of molecule, or arrangement of atoms, that has worked its way into our noses. First of all, how did it work its way in? That is rather easy. If the smell is some kind of molecule in the air, jiggling around and being knocked every which way, it might have accidentally worked its way into the nose. Certainly it has no particular desire to get into our nose. It is merely one helpless part of a jostling crowd of molecules, and in its aimless wanderings this particular chunk of matter happens to find itself in the nose.


Figure 1–9
Now chemists can take special molecules like the odor of violets, and analyze them and tell us the exact arrangement of the atoms in space. We know that the carbon dioxide molecule is straight and symmetrical: O—C—O. (That can be determined easily, too, by physical methods.) However, even for the vastly more complicated arrangements of atoms that there are in chemistry, one can, by a long, remarkable process of detective work, find the arrangements of the atoms. Figure 1–9 is a picture of the air in the neighborhood of a violet; again we find nitrogen and oxygen in the air, and water vapor. (Why is there water vapor? Because the violet is wet. All plants transpire.) However, we also see a “monster” composed of carbon atoms, hydrogen atoms, and oxygen atoms, which have picked a certain particular pattern in which to be arranged. It is a much more complicated arrangement than that of carbon dioxide; in fact, it is an enormously complicated arrangement. Unfortunately, we cannot picture all that is really known about it chemically, because the precise arrangement of all the atoms is actually known in three dimensions, while our picture is in only two dimensions. The six carbons which form a ring do not form a flat ring, but a kind of “puckered” ring. All of the angles and distances are known. So a chemical formula is merely a picture of such a molecule. When the chemist writes such a thing on the blackboard, he is trying to “draw,” roughly speaking, in two dimensions. For example, we see a “ring” of six carbons, and a “chain” of carbons hanging on the end, with an oxygen second from the end, three hydrogens tied to that carbon, two carbons and three hydrogens sticking up here, etc.


Fig. 1–10.The substance pictured is α
-irone.
How does the chemist find what the arrangement is? He mixes bottles full of stuff together, and if it turns red, it tells him that it consists of one hydrogen and two carbons tied on here; if it turns blue, on the other hand, that is not the way it is at all. This is one of the most fantastic pieces of detective work that has ever been done—organic chemistry. To discover the arrangement of the atoms in these enormously complicated arrays the chemist looks at what happens when he mixes two different substances together. The physicist could never quite believe that the chemist knew what he was talking about when he described the arrangement of the atoms. For about twenty years it has been possible, in some cases, to look at such molecules (not quite as complicated as this one, but some which contain parts of it) by a physical method, and it has been possible to locate every atom, not by looking at colors, but by measuring where they are. And lo and behold!, the chemists are almost always correct.

It turns out, in fact, that in the odor of violets there are three slightly different molecules, which differ only in the arrangement of the hydrogen atoms.

One problem of chemistry is to name a substance, so that we will know what it is. Find a name for this shape! Not only must the name tell the shape, but it must also tell that here is an oxygen atom, there a hydrogen—exactly what and where each atom is. So we can appreciate that the chemical names must be complex in order to be complete. You see that the name of this thing in the more complete form that will tell you the structure of it is 4-(2, 2, 3, 6 tetramethyl-5-cyclohexenyl)-3-buten-2-one, and that tells you that this is the arrangement. We can appreciate the difficulties that the chemists have, and also appreciate the reason for such long names. It is not that they wish to be obscure, but they have an extremely difficult problem in trying to describe the molecules in words!

How do we know that there are atoms? By one of the tricks mentioned earlier: we make the hypothesis that there are atoms, and one after the other results come out the way we predict, as they ought to if things are made of atoms. There is also somewhat more direct evidence, a good example of which is the following: The atoms are so small that you cannot see them with a light microscope—in fact, not even with an electron microscope. (With a light microscope you can only see things which are much bigger.) Now if the atoms are always in motion, say in water, and we put a big ball of something in the water, a ball much bigger than the atoms, the ball will jiggle around—much as in a push ball game, where a great big ball is pushed around by a lot of people. The people are pushing in various directions, and the ball moves around the field in an irregular fashion. So, in the same way, the “large ball” will move because of the inequalities of the collisions on one side to the other, from one moment to the next. Therefore, if we look at very tiny particles (colloids) in water through an excellent microscope, we see a perpetual jiggling of the particles, which is the result of the bombardment of the atoms. This is called the Brownian motion.

We can see further evidence for atoms in the structure of crystals. In many cases the structures deduced by x-ray analysis agree in their spatial “shapes” with the forms actually exhibited by crystals as they occur in nature. The angles between the various “faces” of a crystal agree, within seconds of arc, with angles deduced on the assumption that a crystal is made of many “layers” of atoms.

Everything is made of atoms. That is the key hypothesis. The most important hypothesis in all of biology, for example, is that everything that animals do, atoms do. In other words, there is nothing that living things do that cannot be understood from the point of view that they are made of atoms acting according to the laws of physics. This was not known from the beginning: it took some experimenting and theorizing to suggest this hypothesis, but now it is accepted, and it is the most useful theory for producing new ideas in the field of biology.

If a piece of steel or a piece of salt, consisting of atoms one next to the other, can have such interesting properties; if water—which is nothing but these little blobs, mile upon mile of the same thing over the earth—can form waves and foam, and make rushing noises and strange patterns as it runs over cement; if all of this, all the life of a stream of water, can be nothing but a pile of atoms, how much more is possible? If instead of arranging the atoms in some definite pattern, again and again repeated, on and on, or even forming little lumps of complexity like the odor of violets, we make an arrangement which is always different from place to place, with different kinds of atoms arranged in many ways, continually changing, not repeating, how much more marvelously is it possible that this thing might behave? Is it possible that that “thing” walking back and forth in front of you, talking to you, is a great glob of these atoms in a very complex arrangement, such that the sheer complexity of it staggers the imagination as to what it can do? When we say we are a pile of atoms, we do not mean we are merely a pile of atoms, because a pile of atoms which is not repeated from one to the other might well have the possibilities which you see before you in the mirror.



=== CHAPTER 2 : BASICS IN PHYSICS ===



2–1Introduction
In this chapter, we shall examine the most fundamental ideas that we have about physics—the nature of things as we see them at the present time. We shall not discuss the history of how we know that all these ideas are true; you will learn these details in due time.

The things with which we concern ourselves in science appear in myriad forms, and with a multitude of attributes. For example, if we stand on the shore and look at the sea, we see the water, the waves breaking, the foam, the sloshing motion of the water, the sound, the air, the winds and the clouds, the sun and the blue sky, and light; there is sand and there are rocks of various hardness and permanence, color and texture. There are animals and seaweed, hunger and disease, and the observer on the beach; there may be even happiness and thought. Any other spot in nature has a similar variety of things and influences. It is always as complicated as that, no matter where it is. Curiosity demands that we ask questions, that we try to put things together and try to understand this multitude of aspects as perhaps resulting from the action of a relatively small number of elemental things and forces acting in an infinite variety of combinations.

For example: Is the sand other than the rocks? That is, is the sand perhaps nothing but a great number of very tiny stones? Is the moon a great rock? If we understood rocks, would we also understand the sand and the moon? Is the wind a sloshing of the air analogous to the sloshing motion of the water in the sea? What common features do different movements have? What is common to different kinds of sound? How many different colors are there? And so on. In this way we try gradually to analyze all things, to put together things which at first sight look different, with the hope that we may be able to reduce the number of different things and thereby understand them better.

A few hundred years ago, a method was devised to find partial answers to such questions. Observation, reason, and experiment make up what we call the scientific method. We shall have to limit ourselves to a bare description of our basic view of what is sometimes called fundamental physics, or fundamental ideas which have arisen from the application of the scientific method.

What do we mean by “understanding” something? We can imagine that this complicated array of moving things which constitutes “the world” is something like a great chess game being played by the gods, and we are observers of the game. We do not know what the rules of the game are; all we are allowed to do is to watch the playing. Of course, if we watch long enough, we may eventually catch on to a few of the rules. The rules of the game are what we mean by fundamental physics. Even if we knew every rule, however, we might not be able to understand why a particular move is made in the game, merely because it is too complicated and our minds are limited. If you play chess you must know that it is easy to learn all the rules, and yet it is often very hard to select the best move or to understand why a player moves as he does. So it is in nature, only much more so; but we may be able at least to find all the rules. Actually, we do not have all the rules now. (Every once in a while something like castling is going on that we still do not understand.) Aside from not knowing all of the rules, what we really can explain in terms of those rules is very limited, because almost all situations are so enormously complicated that we cannot follow the plays of the game using the rules, much less tell what is going to happen next. We must, therefore, limit ourselves to the more basic question of the rules of the game. If we know the rules, we consider that we “understand” the world.

How can we tell whether the rules which we “guess” at are really right if we cannot analyze the game very well? There are, roughly speaking, three ways. First, there may be situations where nature has arranged, or we arrange nature, to be simple and to have so few parts that we can predict exactly what will happen, and thus we can check how our rules work. (In one corner of the board there may be only a few chess pieces at work, and that we can figure out exactly.)

A second good way to check rules is in terms of less specific rules derived from them. For example, the rule on the move of a bishop on a chessboard is that it moves only on the diagonal. One can deduce, no matter how many moves may be made, that a certain bishop will always be on a red square. So, without being able to follow the details, we can always check our idea about the bishop’s motion by finding out whether it is always on a red square. Of course it will be, for a long time, until all of a sudden we find that it is on a black square (what happened of course, is that in the meantime it was captured, another pawn crossed for queening, and it turned into a bishop on a black square). That is the way it is in physics. For a long time we will have a rule that works excellently in an overall way, even when we cannot follow the details, and then some time we may discover a new rule. From the point of view of basic physics, the most interesting phenomena are of course in the new places, the places where the rules do not work—not the places where they do work! That is the way in which we discover new rules.

The third way to tell whether our ideas are right is relatively crude but probably the most powerful of them all. That is, by rough approximation. While we may not be able to tell why Alekhine moves this particular piece, perhaps we can roughly understand that he is gathering his pieces around the king to protect it, more or less, since that is the sensible thing to do in the circumstances. In the same way, we can often understand nature, more or less, without being able to see what every little piece is doing, in terms of our understanding of the game.

At first the phenomena of nature were roughly divided into classes, like heat, electricity, mechanics, magnetism, properties of substances, chemical phenomena, light or optics, x-rays, nuclear physics, gravitation, meson phenomena, etc. However, the aim is to see complete nature as different aspects of one set of phenomena. That is the problem in basic theoretical physics, today—to find the laws behind experiment; to amalgamate these classes. Historically, we have always been able to amalgamate them, but as time goes on new things are found. We were amalgamating very well, when all of a sudden x-rays were found. Then we amalgamated some more, and mesons were found. Therefore, at any stage of the game, it always looks rather messy. A great deal is amalgamated, but there are always many wires or threads hanging out in all directions. That is the situation today, which we shall try to describe.

Some historic examples of amalgamation are the following. First, take heat and mechanics. When atoms are in motion, the more motion, the more heat the system contains, and so heat and all temperature effects can be represented by the laws of mechanics. Another tremendous amalgamation was the discovery of the relation between electricity, magnetism, and light, which were found to be different aspects of the same thing, which we call today the electromagnetic field. Another amalgamation is the unification of chemical phenomena, the various properties of various substances, and the behavior of atomic particles, which is in the quantum mechanics of chemistry.

The question is, of course, is it going to be possible to amalgamate everything, and merely discover that this world represents different aspects of one thing? Nobody knows. All we know is that as we go along, we find that we can amalgamate pieces, and then we find some pieces that do not fit, and we keep trying to put the jigsaw puzzle together. Whether there are a finite number of pieces, and whether there is even a border to the puzzle, is of course unknown. It will never be known until we finish the picture, if ever. What we wish to do here is to see to what extent this amalgamation process has gone on, and what the situation is at present, in understanding basic phenomena in terms of the smallest set of principles. To express it in a simple manner, what are things made of and how few elements are there?

2–2Physics before 1920
It is a little difficult to begin at once with the present view, so we shall first see how things looked in about 1920 and then take a few things out of that picture. Before 1920, our world picture was something like this: The “stage” on which the universe goes is the three-dimensional space of geometry, as described by Euclid, and things change in a medium called time. The elements on the stage are particles, for example the atoms, which have some properties. First, the property of inertia: if a particle is moving it keeps on going in the same direction unless forces act upon it. The second element, then, is forces, which were then thought to be of two varieties: First, an enormously complicated, detailed kind of interaction force which held the various atoms in different combinations in a complicated way, which determined whether salt would dissolve faster or slower when we raise the temperature. The other force that was known was a long-range interaction—a smooth and quiet attraction—which varied inversely as the square of the distance, and was called gravitation. This law was known and was very simple. Why things remain in motion when they are moving, or why there is a law of gravitation was, of course, not known.

A description of nature is what we are concerned with here. From this point of view, then, a gas, and indeed all matter, is a myriad of moving particles. Thus many of the things we saw while standing at the seashore can immediately be connected. First the pressure: this comes from the collisions of the atoms with the walls or whatever; the drift of the atoms, if they are all moving in one direction on the average, is wind; the random internal motions are the heat. There are waves of excess density, where too many particles have collected, and so as they rush off they push up piles of particles farther out, and so on. This wave of excess density is sound. It is a tremendous achievement to be able to understand so much. Some of these things were described in the previous chapter.

What kinds of particles are there? There were considered to be 92
 at that time: 92
 different kinds of atoms were ultimately discovered. They had different names associated with their chemical properties.

The next part of the problem was, what are the short-range forces? Why does carbon attract one oxygen or perhaps two oxygens, but not three oxygens? What is the machinery of interaction between atoms? Is it gravitation? The answer is no. Gravity is entirely too weak. But imagine a force analogous to gravity, varying inversely with the square of the distance, but enormously more powerful and having one difference. In gravity everything attracts everything else, but now imagine that there are two kinds of “things,” and that this new force (which is the electrical force, of course) has the property that likes repel but unlikes attract. The “thing” that carries this strong interaction is called charge.

Then what do we have? Suppose that we have two unlikes that attract each other, a plus and a minus, and that they stick very close together. Suppose we have another charge some distance away. Would it feel any attraction? It would feel practically none, because if the first two are equal in size, the attraction for the one and the repulsion for the other balance out. Therefore there is very little force at any appreciable distance. On the other hand, if we get very close with the extra charge, attraction arises, because the repulsion of likes and attraction of unlikes will tend to bring unlikes closer together and push likes farther apart. Then the repulsion will be less than the attraction. This is the reason why the atoms, which are constituted out of plus and minus electric charges, feel very little force when they are separated by appreciable distance (aside from gravity). When they come close together, they can “see inside” each other and rearrange their charges, with the result that they have a very strong interaction. The ultimate basis of an interaction between the atoms is electrical. Since this force is so enormous, all the plusses and all minuses will normally come together in as intimate a combination as they can. All things, even ourselves, are made of fine-grained, enormously strongly interacting plus and minus parts, all neatly balanced out. Once in a while, by accident, we may rub off a few minuses or a few plusses (usually it is easier to rub off minuses), and in those circumstances we find the force of electricity unbalanced, and we can then see the effects of these electrical attractions.

To give an idea of how much stronger electricity is than gravitation, consider two grains of sand, a millimeter across, thirty meters apart. If the force between them were not balanced, if everything attracted everything else instead of likes repelling, so that there were no cancellation, how much force would there be? There would be a force of three million tons between the two! You see, there is very, very little excess or deficit of the number of negative or positive charges necessary to produce appreciable electrical effects. This is, of course, the reason why you cannot see the difference between an electrically charged or uncharged thing—so few particles are involved that they hardly make a difference in the weight or size of an object.

With this picture the atoms were easier to understand. They were thought to have a “nucleus” at the center, which is positively electrically charged and very massive, and the nucleus is surrounded by a certain number of “electrons” which are very light and negatively charged. Now we go a little ahead in our story to remark that in the nucleus itself there were found two kinds of particles, protons and neutrons, almost of the same weight and very heavy. The protons are electrically charged and the neutrons are neutral. If we have an atom with six protons inside its nucleus, and this is surrounded by six electrons (the negative particles in the ordinary world of matter are all electrons, and these are very light compared with the protons and neutrons which make nuclei), this would be atom number six in the chemical table, and it is called carbon. Atom number eight is called oxygen, etc., because the chemical properties depend upon the electrons on the outside, and in fact only upon how many electrons there are. So the chemical properties of a substance depend only on a number, the number of electrons. (The whole list of elements of the chemists really could have been called 1
, 2
, 3
, 4
, 5
, etc. Instead of saying “carbon,” we could say “element six,” meaning six electrons, but of course, when the elements were first discovered, it was not known that they could be numbered that way, and secondly, it would make everything look rather complicated. It is better to have names and symbols for these things, rather than to call everything by number.)

More was discovered about the electrical force. The natural interpretation of electrical interaction is that two objects simply attract each other: plus against minus. However, this was discovered to be an inadequate idea to represent it. A more adequate representation of the situation is to say that the existence of the positive charge, in some sense, distorts, or creates a “condition” in space, so that when we put the negative charge in, it feels a force. This potentiality for producing a force is called an electric field. When we put an electron in an electric field, we say it is “pulled.” We then have two rules: (a) charges make a field, and (b) charges in fields have forces on them and move. The reason for this will become clear when we discuss the following phenomena: If we were to charge a body, say a comb, electrically, and then place a charged piece of paper at a distance and move the comb back and forth, the paper will respond by always pointing to the comb. If we shake it faster, it will be discovered that the paper is a little behind, there is a delay in the action. (At the first stage, when we move the comb rather slowly, we find a complication which is magnetism. Magnetic influences have to do with charges in relative motion, so magnetic forces and electric forces can really be attributed to one field, as two different aspects of exactly the same thing. A changing electric field cannot exist without magnetism.) If we move the charged paper farther out, the delay is greater. Then an interesting thing is observed. Although the forces between two charged objects should go inversely as the square of the distance, it is found, when we shake a charge, that the influence extends very much farther out than we would guess at first sight. That is, the effect falls off more slowly than the inverse square.

Here is an analogy: If we are in a pool of water and there is a floating cork very close by, we can move it “directly” by pushing the water with another cork. If you looked only at the two corks, all you would see would be that one moved immediately in response to the motion of the other—there is some kind of “interaction” between them. Of course, what we really do is to disturb the water; the water then disturbs the other cork. We could make up a “law” that if you pushed the water a little bit, an object close by in the water would move. If it were farther away, of course, the second cork would scarcely move, for we move the water locally. On the other hand, if we jiggle the cork a new phenomenon is involved, in which the motion of the water moves the water there, etc., and waves travel away, so that by jiggling, there is an influence very much farther out, an oscillatory influence, that cannot be understood from the direct interaction. Therefore the idea of direct interaction must be replaced with the existence of the water, or in the electrical case, with what we call the electromagnetic field.

The electromagnetic field can carry waves; some of these waves are light, others are used in radio broadcasts, but the general name is electromagnetic waves. These oscillatory waves can have various frequencies. The only thing that is really different from one wave to another is the frequency of oscillation. If we shake a charge back and forth more and more rapidly, and look at the effects, we get a whole series of different kinds of effects, which are all unified by specifying but one number, the number of oscillations per second. The usual “pickup” that we get from electric currents in the circuits in the walls of a building have a frequency of about one hundred cycles per second. If we increase the frequency to 500
 or 1000
 kilocycles (1
 kilocycle=1000
 cycles) per second, we are “on the air,” for this is the frequency range which is used for radio broadcasts. (Of course it has nothing to do with the air! We can have radio broadcasts without any air.) If we again increase the frequency, we come into the range that is used for FM and TV. Going still further, we use certain short waves, for example for radar. Still higher, and we do not need an instrument to “see” the stuff, we can see it with the human eye. In the range of frequency from 5×1014
 to 1015
 cycles per second our eyes would see the oscillation of the charged comb, if we could shake it that fast, as red, blue, or violet light, depending on the frequency. Frequencies below this range are called infrared, and above it, ultraviolet. The fact that we can see in a particular frequency range makes that part of the electromagnetic spectrum no more impressive than the other parts from a physicist’s standpoint, but from a human standpoint, of course, it is more interesting. If we go up even higher in frequency, we get x-rays. X-rays are nothing but very high-frequency light. If we go still higher, we get gamma rays. These two terms, x-rays and gamma rays, are used almost synonymously. Usually electromagnetic rays coming from nuclei are called gamma rays, while those of high energy from atoms are called x-rays, but at the same frequency they are indistinguishable physically, no matter what their source. If we go to still higher frequencies, say to 1024
 cycles per second, we find that we can make those waves artificially, for example with the synchrotron here at Caltech. We can find electromagnetic waves with stupendously high frequencies—with even a thousand times more rapid oscillation—in the waves found in cosmic rays. These waves cannot be controlled by us.

Table 2–1
The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Frequency
in oscillations/sec	Name	Rough
behavior
102
Electrical disturbance	Field
5×105
 – 106
Radio broadcast	Waves
108
FM—TV
1010
Radar
5×1014
 – 1015
Light
1018
X-rays	Particle
1021
γ
-rays, nuclear
1024
γ
-rays, “artificial”
1027
γ
-rays, in cosmic rays
2–3Quantum physics
Having described the idea of the electromagnetic field, and that this field can carry waves, we soon learn that these waves actually behave in a strange way which seems very unwavelike. At higher frequencies they behave much more like particles! It is quantum mechanics, discovered just after 1920, which explains this strange behavior. In the years before 1920, the picture of space as a three-dimensional space, and of time as a separate thing, was changed by Einstein, first into a combination which we call space-time, and then still further into a curved space-time to represent gravitation. So the “stage” is changed into space-time, and gravitation is presumably a modification of space-time. Then it was also found that the rules for the motions of particles were incorrect. The mechanical rules of “inertia” and “forces” are wrong—Newton’s laws are wrong—in the world of atoms. Instead, it was discovered that things on a small scale behave nothing like things on a large scale. That is what makes physics difficult—and very interesting. It is hard because the way things behave on a small scale is so “unnatural”; we have no direct experience with it. Here things behave like nothing we know of, so that it is impossible to describe this behavior in any other than analytic ways. It is difficult, and takes a lot of imagination.

Quantum mechanics has many aspects. In the first place, the idea that a particle has a definite location and a definite speed is no longer allowed; that is wrong. To give an example of how wrong classical physics is, there is a rule in quantum mechanics that says that one cannot know both where something is and how fast it is moving. The uncertainty of the momentum and the uncertainty of the position are complementary, and the product of the two is bounded by a small constant. We can write the law like this: ΔxΔp≥ℏ/2
, but we shall explain it in more detail later. This rule is the explanation of a very mysterious paradox: if the atoms are made out of plus and minus charges, why don’t the minus charges simply sit on top of the plus charges (they attract each other) and get so close as to completely cancel them out? Why are atoms so big? Why is the nucleus at the center with the electrons around it? It was first thought that this was because the nucleus was so big; but no, the nucleus is very small. An atom has a diameter of about 10−8
 cm. The nucleus has a diameter of about 10−13
 cm. If we had an atom and wished to see the nucleus, we would have to magnify it until the whole atom was the size of a large room, and then the nucleus would be a bare speck which you could just about make out with the eye, but very nearly all the weight of the atom is in that infinitesimal nucleus. What keeps the electrons from simply falling in? This principle: If they were in the nucleus, we would know their position precisely, and the uncertainty principle would then require that they have a very large (but uncertain) momentum, i.e., a very large kinetic energy. With this energy they would break away from the nucleus. They make a compromise: they leave themselves a little room for this uncertainty and then jiggle with a certain amount of minimum motion in accordance with this rule. (Remember that when a crystal is cooled to absolute zero, we said that the atoms do not stop moving, they still jiggle. Why? If they stopped moving, we would know where they were and that they had zero motion, and that is against the uncertainty principle. We cannot know where they are and how fast they are moving, so they must be continually wiggling in there!)

Another most interesting change in the ideas and philosophy of science brought about by quantum mechanics is this: it is not possible to predict exactly what will happen in any circumstance. For example, it is possible to arrange an atom which is ready to emit light, and we can measure when it has emitted light by picking up a photon particle, which we shall describe shortly. We cannot, however, predict when it is going to emit the light or, with several atoms, which one is going to. You may say that this is because there are some internal “wheels” which we have not looked at closely enough. No, there are no internal wheels; nature, as we understand it today, behaves in such a way that it is fundamentally impossible to make a precise prediction of exactly what will happen in a given experiment. This is a horrible thing; in fact, philosophers have said before that one of the fundamental requisites of science is that whenever you set up the same conditions, the same thing must happen. This is simply not true, it is not a fundamental condition of science. The fact is that the same thing does not happen, that we can find only an average, statistically, as to what happens. Nevertheless, science has not completely collapsed. Philosophers, incidentally, say a great deal about what is absolutely necessary for science, and it is always, so far as one can see, rather naive, and probably wrong. For example, some philosopher or other said it is fundamental to the scientific effort that if an experiment is performed in, say, Stockholm, and then the same experiment is done in, say, Quito, the same results must occur. That is quite false. It is not necessary for science to do that; it may be a fact of experience, but it is not necessary. For example, if one of the experiments is to look out at the sky and see the aurora borealis in Stockholm, you do not see it in Quito; that is a different phenomenon. “But,” you say, “that is something that has to do with the outside; can you close yourself up in a box in Stockholm and pull down the shade and get any difference?” Surely. If we take a pendulum on a universal joint, and pull it out and let go, then the pendulum will swing almost in a plane, but not quite. Slowly the plane keeps changing in Stockholm, but not in Quito. The blinds are down, too. The fact that this happened does not bring on the destruction of science. What is the fundamental hypothesis of science, the fundamental philosophy? We stated it in the first chapter: the sole test of the validity of any idea is experiment. If it turns out that most experiments work out the same in Quito as they do in Stockholm, then those “most experiments” will be used to formulate some general law, and those experiments which do not come out the same we will say were a result of the environment near Stockholm. We will invent some way to summarize the results of the experiment, and we do not have to be told ahead of time what this way will look like. If we are told that the same experiment will always produce the same result, that is all very well, but if when we try it, it does not, then it does not. We just have to take what we see, and then formulate all the rest of our ideas in terms of our actual experience.

Returning again to quantum mechanics and fundamental physics, we cannot go into details of the quantum-mechanical principles at this time, of course, because these are rather difficult to understand. We shall assume that they are there, and go on to describe what some of the consequences are. One of the consequences is that things which we used to consider as waves also behave like particles, and particles behave like waves; in fact everything behaves the same way. There is no distinction between a wave and a particle. So quantum mechanics unifies the idea of the field and its waves, and the particles, all into one. Now it is true that when the frequency is low, the field aspect of the phenomenon is more evident, or more useful as an approximate description in terms of everyday experiences. But as the frequency increases, the particle aspects of the phenomenon become more evident with the equipment with which we usually make the measurements. In fact, although we mentioned many frequencies, no phenomenon directly involving a frequency has yet been detected above approximately 1012
 cycles per second. We only deduce the higher frequencies from the energy of the particles, by a rule which assumes that the particle-wave idea of quantum mechanics is valid.

Thus we have a new view of electromagnetic interaction. We have a new kind of particle to add to the electron, the proton, and the neutron. That new particle is called a photon. The new view of the interaction of electrons and photons that is electromagnetic theory, but with everything quantum-mechanically correct, is called quantum electrodynamics. This fundamental theory of the interaction of light and matter, or electric field and charges, is our greatest success so far in physics. In this one theory we have the basic rules for all ordinary phenomena except for gravitation and nuclear processes. For example, out of quantum electrodynamics come all known electrical, mechanical, and chemical laws: the laws for the collision of billiard balls, the motions of wires in magnetic fields, the specific heat of carbon monoxide, the color of neon signs, the density of salt, and the reactions of hydrogen and oxygen to make water are all consequences of this one law. All these details can be worked out if the situation is simple enough for us to make an approximation, which is almost never, but often we can understand more or less what is happening. At the present time no exceptions are found to the quantum-electrodynamic laws outside the nucleus, and there we do not know whether there is an exception because we simply do not know what is going on in the nucleus.

In principle, then, quantum electrodynamics is the theory of all chemistry, and of life, if life is ultimately reduced to chemistry and therefore just to physics because chemistry is already reduced (the part of physics which is involved in chemistry being already known). Furthermore, the same quantum electrodynamics, this great thing, predicts a lot of new things. In the first place, it tells the properties of very high-energy photons, gamma rays, etc. It predicted another very remarkable thing: besides the electron, there should be another particle of the same mass, but of opposite charge, called a positron, and these two, coming together, could annihilate each other with the emission of light or gamma rays. (After all, light and gamma rays are all the same, they are just different points on a frequency scale.) The generalization of this, that for each particle there is an antiparticle, turns out to be true. In the case of electrons, the antiparticle has another name—it is called a positron, but for most other particles, it is called anti-so-and-so, like antiproton or antineutron. In quantum electrodynamics, two numbers are put in and most of the other numbers in the world are supposed to come out. The two numbers that are put in are called the mass of the electron and the charge of the electron. Actually, that is not quite true, for we have a whole set of numbers for chemistry which tells how heavy the nuclei are. That leads us to the next part.

2–4Nuclei and particles
What are the nuclei made of, and how are they held together? It is found that the nuclei are held together by enormous forces. When these are released, the energy released is tremendous compared with chemical energy, in the same ratio as the atomic bomb explosion is to a TNT explosion, because, of course, the atomic bomb has to do with changes inside the nucleus, while the explosion of TNT has to do with the changes of the electrons on the outside of the atoms. The question is, what are the forces which hold the protons and neutrons together in the nucleus? Just as the electrical interaction can be connected to a particle, a photon, Yukawa suggested that the forces between neutrons and protons also have a field of some kind, and that when this field jiggles it behaves like a particle. Thus there could be some other particles in the world besides protons and neutrons, and he was able to deduce the properties of these particles from the already known characteristics of nuclear forces. For example, he predicted they should have a mass of two or three hundred times that of an electron; and lo and behold, in cosmic rays there was discovered a particle of the right mass! But it later turned out to be the wrong particle. It was called a μ
-meson, or muon.

However, a little while later, in 1947 or 1948, another particle was found, the π
-meson, or pion, which satisfied Yukawa’s criterion. Besides the proton and the neutron, then, in order to get nuclear forces we must add the pion. Now, you say, “Oh great!, with this theory we make quantum nucleodynamics using the pions just like Yukawa wanted to do, and see if it works, and everything will be explained.” Bad luck. It turns out that the calculations that are involved in this theory are so difficult that no one has ever been able to figure out what the consequences of the theory are, or to check it against experiment, and this has been going on now for almost twenty years!

So we are stuck with a theory, and we do not know whether it is right or wrong, but we do know that it is a little wrong, or at least incomplete. While we have been dawdling around theoretically, trying to calculate the consequences of this theory, the experimentalists have been discovering some things. For example, they had already discovered this muon, and we do not yet know where it fits. Also, in cosmic rays, a large number of other “extra” particles were found. It turns out that today we have approximately thirty particles, and it is very difficult to understand the relationships of all these particles, and what nature wants them for, or what the connections are from one to another. We do not today understand these various particles as different aspects of the same thing, and the fact that we have so many unconnected particles is a representation of the fact that we have so much unconnected information without a good theory. After the great successes of quantum electrodynamics, there is a certain amount of knowledge of nuclear physics which is rough knowledge, sort of half experience and half theory, assuming a type of force between protons and neutrons and seeing what will happen, but not really understanding where the force comes from. Aside from that, we have made very little progress. We have collected an enormous number of chemical elements. In the chemical case, there suddenly appeared a relationship among these elements which was unexpected, and which is embodied in the periodic table of Mendeleev. For example, sodium and potassium are about the same in their chemical properties and are found in the same column in the Mendeleev chart. We have been seeking a Mendeleev-type chart for the new particles. One such chart of the new particles was made independently by Gell-Mann in the U.S.A. and Nishijima in Japan. The basis of their classification is a new number, like the electric charge, which can be assigned to each particle, called its “strangeness,” S
. This number is conserved, like the electric charge, in reactions which take place by nuclear forces.

Table 2–2
Elementary Particles

In Table 2–2 are listed all the particles. We cannot discuss them much at this stage, but the table will at least show you how much we do not know. Underneath each particle its mass is given in a certain unit, called the MeV. One MeV is equal to 1.783×10−27
 gram. The reason this unit was chosen is historical, and we shall not go into it now. More massive particles are put higher up on the chart; we see that a neutron and a proton have almost the same mass. In vertical columns we have put the particles with the same electrical charge, all neutral objects in one column, all positively charged ones to the right of this one, and all negatively charged objects to the left.

Particles are shown with a solid line and “resonances” with a dashed one. Several particles have been omitted from the table. These include the important zero-mass, zero-charge particles, the photon and the graviton, which do not fall into the baryon-meson-lepton classification scheme, and also some of the newer resonances (K∗
, ϕ
, η
). The antiparticles of the mesons are listed in the table, but the antiparticles of the leptons and baryons would have to be listed in another table which would look exactly like this one reflected on the zero-charge column. Although all of the particles except the electron, neutrino, photon, graviton, and proton are unstable, decay products have been shown only for the resonances. Strangeness assignments are not applicable for leptons, since they do not interact strongly with nuclei.

All particles which are together with the neutrons and protons are called baryons, and the following ones exist: There is a “lambda,” with a mass of 1115
 MeV, and three others, called sigmas, minus, neutral, and plus, with several masses almost the same. There are groups or multiplets with almost the same mass, within one or two percent. Each particle in a multiplet has the same strangeness. The first multiplet is the proton-neutron doublet, and then there is a singlet (the lambda) then the sigma triplet, and finally the xi doublet. Very recently, in 1961, even a few more particles were found. Or are they particles? They live so short a time, they disintegrate almost instantaneously, as soon as they are formed, that we do not know whether they should be considered as new particles, or some kind of “resonance” interaction of a certain definite energy between the Λ
 and π
 products into which they disintegrate.

In addition to the baryons the other particles which are involved in the nuclear interaction are called mesons. There are first the pions, which come in three varieties, positive, negative, and neutral; they form another multiplet. We have also found some new things called K-mesons, and they occur as a doublet, K+
 and K0
. Also, every particle has its antiparticle, unless a particle is its own antiparticle. For example, the π−
 and the π+
 are antiparticles, but the π0
 is its own antiparticle. The K−
 and K+
 are antiparticles, and the K0
 and K¯¯¯¯0
. In addition, in 1961 we also found some more mesons or maybe mesons which disintegrate almost immediately. A thing called ω
 which goes into three pions has a mass 780
 on this scale, and somewhat less certain is an object which disintegrates into two pions. These particles, called mesons and baryons, and the antiparticles of the mesons are on the same chart, but the antiparticles of the baryons must be put on another chart, “reflected” through the charge-zero column.

Just as Mendeleev’s chart was very good, except for the fact that there were a number of rare earth elements which were hanging out loose from it, so we have a number of things hanging out loose from this chart—particles which do not interact strongly in nuclei, have nothing to do with a nuclear interaction, and do not have a strong interaction (I mean the powerful kind of interaction of nuclear energy). These are called leptons, and they are the following: there is the electron, which has a very small mass on this scale, only 0.510
 MeV. Then there is that other, the muon, which has a mass much higher, 206
 times as heavy as an electron. So far as we can tell, by all experiments so far, the difference between the electron and the muon is nothing but the mass. Everything works exactly the same for the muon as for the electron, except that one is heavier than the other. Why is there another one heavier; what is the use for it? We do not know. In addition, there is a lepton which is neutral, called a neutrino, and this particle has zero mass. In fact, it is now known that there are two different kinds of neutrinos, one related to electrons and the other related to muons.

Finally, we have two other particles which do not interact strongly with the nuclear ones: one is a photon, and perhaps, if the field of gravity also has a quantum-mechanical analog (a quantum theory of gravitation has not yet been worked out), then there will be a particle, a graviton, which will have zero mass.

What is this “zero mass”? The masses given here are the masses of the particles at rest. The fact that a particle has zero mass means, in a way, that it cannot be at rest. A photon is never at rest, it is always moving at 186,000
 miles a second. We will understand more what mass means when we understand the theory of relativity, which will come in due time.

Thus we are confronted with a large number of particles, which together seem to be the fundamental constituents of matter. Fortunately, these particles are not all different in their interactions with one another. In fact, there seem to be just four kinds of interaction between particles which, in the order of decreasing strength, are the nuclear force, electrical interactions, the beta-decay interaction, and gravity. The photon is coupled to all charged particles and the strength of the interaction is measured by some number, which is 1/137
. The detailed law of this coupling is known, that is quantum electrodynamics. Gravity is coupled to all energy, but its coupling is extremely weak, much weaker than that of electricity. This law is also known. Then there are the so-called weak decays—beta decay, which causes the neutron to disintegrate into proton, electron, and neutrino, relatively slowly. This law is only partly known. The so-called strong interaction, the meson-baryon interaction, has a strength of 1
 in this scale, and the law is completely unknown, although there are a number of known rules, such as that the number of baryons does not change in any reaction.

Table 2–3
Elementary Interactions
Coupling	Strength*	Law
Photon to charged particles	∼10−2
Law known
Gravity to all energy	∼10−40
Law known
Weak decays	∼10−5
Law partly known
Mesons to baryons	∼1
Law unknown (some rules known)
* The “strength” is a dimensionless measure of the coupling constant involved in each interaction (∼
 means “of the order”).
This then, is the horrible condition of our physics today. To summarize it, I would say this: outside the nucleus, we seem to know all; inside it, quantum mechanics is valid—the principles of quantum mechanics have not been found to fail. The stage on which we put all of our knowledge, we would say, is relativistic space-time; perhaps gravity is involved in space-time. We do not know how the universe got started, and we have never made experiments which check our ideas of space and time accurately, below some tiny distance, so we only know that our ideas work above that distance. We should also add that the rules of the game are the quantum-mechanical principles, and those principles apply, so far as we can tell, to the new particles as well as to the old. The origin of the forces in nuclei leads us to new particles, but unfortunately they appear in great profusion and we lack a complete understanding of their interrelationship, although we already know that there are some very surprising relationships among them. We seem gradually to be groping toward an understanding of the world of subatomic particles, but we really do not know how far we have yet to go in this task.



=== CHAPTER 3 : THE RELATION OF PHYSICS TO OTHER SCIENCES ===



3–1Introduction
Physics is the most fundamental and all-inclusive of the sciences, and has had a profound effect on all scientific development. In fact, physics is the present-day equivalent of what used to be called natural philosophy, from which most of our modern sciences arose. Students of many fields find themselves studying physics because of the basic role it plays in all phenomena. In this chapter we shall try to explain what the fundamental problems in the other sciences are, but of course it is impossible in so small a space really to deal with the complex, subtle, beautiful matters in these other fields. Lack of space also prevents our discussing the relation of physics to engineering, industry, society, and war, or even the most remarkable relationship between mathematics and physics. (Mathematics is not a science from our point of view, in the sense that it is not a natural science. The test of its validity is not experiment.) We must, incidentally, make it clear from the beginning that if a thing is not a science, it is not necessarily bad. For example, love is not a science. So, if something is said not to be a science, it does not mean that there is something wrong with it; it just means that it is not a science.

3–2Chemistry
The science which is perhaps the most deeply affected by physics is chemistry. Historically, the early days of chemistry dealt almost entirely with what we now call inorganic chemistry, the chemistry of substances which are not associated with living things. Considerable analysis was required to discover the existence of the many elements and their relationships—how they make the various relatively simple compounds found in rocks, earth, etc. This early chemistry was very important for physics. The interaction between the two sciences was very great because the theory of atoms was substantiated to a large extent by experiments in chemistry. The theory of chemistry, i.e., of the reactions themselves, was summarized to a large extent in the periodic chart of Mendeleev, which brings out many strange relationships among the various elements, and it was the collection of rules as to which substance is combined with which, and how, that constituted inorganic chemistry. All these rules were ultimately explained in principle by quantum mechanics, so that theoretical chemistry is in fact physics. On the other hand, it must be emphasized that this explanation is in principle. We have already discussed the difference between knowing the rules of the game of chess, and being able to play. So it is that we may know the rules, but we cannot play very well. It turns out to be very difficult to predict precisely what will happen in a given chemical reaction; nevertheless, the deepest part of theoretical chemistry must end up in quantum mechanics.

There is also a branch of physics and chemistry which was developed by both sciences together, and which is extremely important. This is the method of statistics applied in a situation in which there are mechanical laws, which is aptly called statistical mechanics. In any chemical situation a large number of atoms are involved, and we have seen that the atoms are all jiggling around in a very random and complicated way. If we could analyze each collision, and be able to follow in detail the motion of each molecule, we might hope to figure out what would happen, but the many numbers needed to keep track of all these molecules exceeds so enormously the capacity of any computer, and certainly the capacity of the mind, that it was important to develop a method for dealing with such complicated situations. Statistical mechanics, then, is the science of the phenomena of heat, or thermodynamics. Inorganic chemistry is, as a science, now reduced essentially to what are called physical chemistry and quantum chemistry; physical chemistry to study the rates at which reactions occur and what is happening in detail (How do the molecules hit? Which pieces fly off first?, etc.), and quantum chemistry to help us understand what happens in terms of the physical laws.

The other branch of chemistry is organic chemistry, the chemistry of the substances which are associated with living things. For a time it was believed that the substances which are associated with living things were so marvelous that they could not be made by hand, from inorganic materials. This is not at all true—they are just the same as the substances made in inorganic chemistry, but more complicated arrangements of atoms are involved. Organic chemistry obviously has a very close relationship to the biology which supplies its substances, and to industry, and furthermore, much physical chemistry and quantum mechanics can be applied to organic as well as to inorganic compounds. However, the main problems of organic chemistry are not in these aspects, but rather in the analysis and synthesis of the substances which are formed in biological systems, in living things. This leads imperceptibly, in steps, toward biochemistry, and then into biology itself, or molecular biology.

3–3Biology
Thus we come to the science of biology, which is the study of living things. In the early days of biology, the biologists had to deal with the purely descriptive problem of finding out what living things there were, and so they just had to count such things as the hairs of the limbs of fleas. After these matters were worked out with a great deal of interest, the biologists went into the machinery inside the living bodies, first from a gross standpoint, naturally, because it takes some effort to get into the finer details.

There was an interesting early relationship between physics and biology in which biology helped physics in the discovery of the conservation of energy, which was first demonstrated by Mayer in connection with the amount of heat taken in and given out by a living creature.

If we look at the processes of biology of living animals more closely, we see many physical phenomena: the circulation of blood, pumps, pressure, etc. There are nerves: we know what is happening when we step on a sharp stone, and that somehow or other the information goes from the leg up. It is interesting how that happens. In their study of nerves, the biologists have come to the conclusion that nerves are very fine tubes with a complex wall which is very thin; through this wall the cell pumps ions, so that there are positive ions on the outside and negative ions on the inside, like a capacitor. Now this membrane has an interesting property; if it “discharges” in one place, i.e., if some of the ions were able to move through one place, so that the electric voltage is reduced there, that electrical influence makes itself felt on the ions in the neighborhood, and it affects the membrane in such a way that it lets the ions through at neighboring points also. This in turn affects it farther along, etc., and so there is a wave of “penetrability” of the membrane which runs down the fiber when it is “excited” at one end by stepping on the sharp stone. This wave is somewhat analogous to a long sequence of vertical dominoes; if the end one is pushed over, that one pushes the next, etc. Of course this will transmit only one message unless the dominoes are set up again; and similarly in the nerve cell, there are processes which pump the ions slowly out again, to get the nerve ready for the next impulse. So it is that we know what we are doing (or at least where we are). Of course the electrical effects associated with this nerve impulse can be picked up with electrical instruments, and because there are electrical effects, obviously the physics of electrical effects has had a great deal of influence on understanding the phenomenon.

The opposite effect is that, from somewhere in the brain, a message is sent out along a nerve. What happens at the end of the nerve? There the nerve branches out into fine little things, connected to a structure near a muscle, called an endplate. For reasons which are not exactly understood, when the impulse reaches the end of the nerve, little packets of a chemical called acetylcholine are shot off (five or ten molecules at a time) and they affect the muscle fiber and make it contract—how simple! What makes a muscle contract? A muscle is a very large number of fibers close together, containing two different substances, myosin and actomyosin, but the machinery by which the chemical reaction induced by acetylcholine can modify the dimensions of the muscle is not yet known. Thus the fundamental processes in the muscle that make mechanical motions are not known.

Biology is such an enormously wide field that there are hosts of other problems that we cannot mention at all—problems on how vision works (what the light does in the eye), how hearing works, etc. (The way in which thinking works we shall discuss later under psychology.) Now, these things concerning biology which we have just discussed are, from a biological standpoint, really not fundamental, at the bottom of life, in the sense that even if we understood them we still would not understand life itself. To illustrate: the men who study nerves feel their work is very important, because after all you cannot have animals without nerves. But you can have life without nerves. Plants have neither nerves nor muscles, but they are working, they are alive, just the same. So for the fundamental problems of biology we must look deeper; when we do, we discover that all living things have a great many characteristics in common. The most common feature is that they are made of cells, within each of which is complex machinery for doing things chemically. In plant cells, for example, there is machinery for picking up light and generating glucose, which is consumed in the dark to keep the plant alive. When the plant is eaten the glucose itself generates in the animal a series of chemical reactions very closely related to photosynthesis (and its opposite effect in the dark) in plants.


Fig. 3–1.The Krebs cycle.
In the cells of living systems there are many elaborate chemical reactions, in which one compound is changed into another and another. To give some impression of the enormous efforts that have gone into the study of biochemistry, the chart in Fig. 3–1 summarizes our knowledge to date on just one small part of the many series of reactions which occur in cells, perhaps a percent or so of it.

Here we see a whole series of molecules which change from one to another in a sequence or cycle of rather small steps. It is called the Krebs cycle, the respiratory cycle. Each of the chemicals and each of the steps is fairly simple, in terms of what change is made in the molecule, but—and this is a centrally important discovery in biochemistry—these changes are relatively difficult to accomplish in a laboratory. If we have one substance and another very similar substance, the one does not just turn into the other, because the two forms are usually separated by an energy barrier or “hill.” Consider this analogy: If we wanted to take an object from one place to another, at the same level but on the other side of a hill, we could push it over the top, but to do so requires the addition of some energy. Thus most chemical reactions do not occur, because there is what is called an activation energy in the way. In order to add an extra atom to our chemical requires that we get it close enough that some rearrangement can occur; then it will stick. But if we cannot give it enough energy to get it close enough, it will not go to completion, it will just go part way up the “hill” and back down again. However, if we could literally take the molecules in our hands and push and pull the atoms around in such a way as to open a hole to let the new atom in, and then let it snap back, we would have found another way, around the hill, which would not require extra energy, and the reaction would go easily. Now there actually are, in the cells, very large molecules, much larger than the ones whose changes we have been describing, which in some complicated way hold the smaller molecules just right, so that the reaction can occur easily. These very large and complicated things are called enzymes. (They were first called ferments, because they were originally discovered in the fermentation of sugar. In fact, some of the first reactions in the cycle were discovered there.) In the presence of an enzyme the reaction will go.

An enzyme is made of another substance called protein. Enzymes are very big and complicated, and each one is different, each being built to control a certain special reaction. The names of the enzymes are written in Fig. 3–1 at each reaction. (Sometimes the same enzyme may control two reactions.) We emphasize that the enzymes themselves are not involved in the reaction directly. They do not change; they merely let an atom go from one place to another. Having done so, the enzyme is ready to do it to the next molecule, like a machine in a factory. Of course, there must be a supply of certain atoms and a way of disposing of other atoms. Take hydrogen, for example: there are enzymes which have special units on them which carry the hydrogen for all chemical reactions. For example, there are three or four hydrogen-reducing enzymes which are used all over our cycle in different places. It is interesting that the machinery which liberates some hydrogen at one place will take that hydrogen and use it somewhere else.

The most important feature of the cycle of Fig. 3–1 is the transformation from GDP to GTP (guanosine-di-phosphate to guanosine-tri-phosphate) because the one substance has much more energy in it than the other. Just as there is a “box” in certain enzymes for carrying hydrogen atoms around, there are special energy-carrying “boxes” which involve the triphosphate group. So, GTP has more energy than GDP and if the cycle is going one way, we are producing molecules which have extra energy and which can go drive some other cycle which requires energy, for example the contraction of muscle. The muscle will not contract unless there is GTP. We can take muscle fiber, put it in water, and add GTP, and the fibers contract, changing GTP to GDP if the right enzymes are present. So the real system is in the GDP-GTP transformation; in the dark the GTP which has been stored up during the day is used to run the whole cycle around the other way. An enzyme, you see, does not care in which direction the reaction goes, for if it did it would violate one of the laws of physics.

Physics is of great importance in biology and other sciences for still another reason, that has to do with experimental techniques. In fact, if it were not for the great development of experimental physics, these biochemistry charts would not be known today. The reason is that the most useful tool of all for analyzing this fantastically complex system is to label the atoms which are used in the reactions. Thus, if we could introduce into the cycle some carbon dioxide which has a “green mark” on it, and then measure after three seconds where the green mark is, and again measure after ten seconds, etc., we could trace out the course of the reactions. What are the “green marks”? They are different isotopes. We recall that the chemical properties of atoms are determined by the number of electrons, not by the mass of the nucleus. But there can be, for example in carbon, six neutrons or seven neutrons, together with the six protons which all carbon nuclei have. Chemically, the two atoms C12
 and C13
 are the same, but they differ in weight and they have different nuclear properties, and so they are distinguishable. By using these isotopes of different weights, or even radioactive isotopes like C14
, which provide a more sensitive means for tracing very small quantities, it is possible to trace the reactions.

Now, we return to the description of enzymes and proteins. Not all proteins are enzymes, but all enzymes are proteins. There are many proteins, such as the proteins in muscle, the structural proteins which are, for example, in cartilage and hair, skin, etc., that are not themselves enzymes. However, proteins are a very characteristic substance of life: first of all they make up all the enzymes, and second, they make up much of the rest of living material. Proteins have a very interesting and simple structure. They are a series, or chain, of different amino acids. There are twenty different amino acids, and they all can combine with each other to form chains in which the backbone is CO-NH, etc. Proteins are nothing but chains of various ones of these twenty amino acids. Each of the amino acids probably serves some special purpose. Some, for example, have a sulfur atom at a certain place; when two sulfur atoms are in the same protein, they form a bond, that is, they tie the chain together at two points and form a loop. Another has extra oxygen atoms which make it an acidic substance, another has a basic characteristic. Some of them have big groups hanging out to one side, so that they take up a lot of space. One of the amino acids, called proline, is not really an amino acid, but imino acid. There is a slight difference, with the result that when proline is in the chain, there is a kink in the chain. If we wished to manufacture a particular protein, we would give these instructions: put one of those sulfur hooks here; next, add something to take up space; then attach something to put a kink in the chain. In this way, we will get a complicated-looking chain, hooked together and having some complex structure; this is presumably just the manner in which all the various enzymes are made. One of the great triumphs in recent times (since 1960), was at last to discover the exact spatial atomic arrangement of certain proteins, which involve some fifty-six or sixty amino acids in a row. Over a thousand atoms (more nearly two thousand, if we count the hydrogen atoms) have been located in a complex pattern in two proteins. The first was hemoglobin. One of the sad aspects of this discovery is that we cannot see anything from the pattern; we do not understand why it works the way it does. Of course, that is the next problem to be attacked.

Another problem is how do the enzymes know what to be? A red-eyed fly makes a red-eyed fly baby, and so the information for the whole pattern of enzymes to make red pigment must be passed from one fly to the next. This is done by a substance in the nucleus of the cell, not a protein, called DNA (short for desoxyribose nucleic acid). This is the key substance which is passed from one cell to another (for instance sperm cells consist mostly of DNA) and carries the information as to how to make the enzymes. DNA is the “blueprint.” What does the blueprint look like and how does it work? First, the blueprint must be able to reproduce itself. Secondly, it must be able to instruct the protein. Concerning the reproduction, we might think that this proceeds like cell reproduction. Cells simply grow bigger and then divide in half. Must it be thus with DNA molecules, then, that they too grow bigger and divide in half? Every atom certainly does not grow bigger and divide in half! No, it is impossible to reproduce a molecule except by some more clever way.


Fig. 3–2.Schematic diagram of DNA.
The structure of the substance DNA was studied for a long time, first chemically to find the composition, and then with x-rays to find the pattern in space. The result was the following remarkable discovery: The DNA molecule is a pair of chains, twisted upon each other. The backbone of each of these chains, which are analogous to the chains of proteins but chemically quite different, is a series of sugar and phosphate groups, as shown in Fig. 3–2. Now we see how the chain can contain instructions, for if we could split this chain down the middle, we would have a series BAADC…
 and every living thing could have a different series. Thus perhaps, in some way, the specific instructions for the manufacture of proteins are contained in the specific series of the DNA.

Attached to each sugar along the line, and linking the two chains together, are certain pairs of cross-links. However, they are not all of the same kind; there are four kinds, called adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine, but let us call them A
, B
, C
, and D
. The interesting thing is that only certain pairs can sit opposite each other, for example A
 with B
 and C
 with D
. These pairs are put on the two chains in such a way that they “fit together,” and have a strong energy of interaction. However, C
 will not fit with A
, and B
 will not fit with C
; they will only fit in pairs, A
 against B
 and C
 against D
. Therefore if one is C
, the other must be D
, etc. Whatever the letters may be in one chain, each one must have its specific complementary letter on the other chain.

What then about reproduction? Suppose we split this chain in two. How can we make another one just like it? If, in the substances of the cells, there is a manufacturing department which brings up phosphate, sugar, and A
, B
, C
, D
 units not connected in a chain, the only ones which will attach to our split chain will be the correct ones, the complements of BAADC…
, namely, ABBCD…
 Thus what happens is that the chain splits down the middle during cell division, one half ultimately to go with one cell, the other half to end up in the other cell; when separated, a new complementary chain is made by each half-chain.

Next comes the question, precisely how does the order of the A
, B
, C
, D
 units determine the arrangement of the amino acids in the protein? This is the central unsolved problem in biology today. The first clues, or pieces of information, however, are these: There are in the cell tiny particles called ribosomes, and it is now known that that is the place where proteins are made. But the ribosomes are not in the nucleus, where the DNA and its instructions are. Something seems to be the matter. However, it is also known that little molecule pieces come off the DNA—not as long as the big DNA molecule that carries all the information itself, but like a small section of it. This is called RNA, but that is not essential. It is a kind of copy of the DNA, a short copy. The RNA, which somehow carries a message as to what kind of protein to make goes over to the ribosome; that is known. When it gets there, protein is synthesized at the ribosome. That is also known. However, the details of how the amino acids come in and are arranged in accordance with a code that is on the RNA are, as yet, still unknown. We do not know how to read it. If we knew, for example, the “lineup” A
, B
, C
, C
, A
, we could not tell you what protein is to be made.

Certainly no subject or field is making more progress on so many fronts at the present moment, than biology, and if we were to name the most powerful assumption of all, which leads one on and on in an attempt to understand life, it is that all things are made of atoms, and that everything that living things do can be understood in terms of the jigglings and wigglings of atoms.

3–4Astronomy
In this rapid-fire explanation of the whole world, we must now turn to astronomy. Astronomy is older than physics. In fact, it got physics started by showing the beautiful simplicity of the motion of the stars and planets, the understanding of which was the beginning of physics. But the most remarkable discovery in all of astronomy is that the stars are made of atoms of the same kind as those on the earth.1 How was this done? Atoms liberate light which has definite frequencies, something like the timbre of a musical instrument, which has definite pitches or frequencies of sound. When we are listening to several different tones we can tell them apart, but when we look with our eyes at a mixture of colors we cannot tell the parts from which it was made, because the eye is nowhere near as discerning as the ear in this connection. However, with a spectroscope we can analyze the frequencies of the light waves and in this way we can see the very tunes of the atoms that are in the different stars. As a matter of fact, two of the chemical elements were discovered on a star before they were discovered on the earth. Helium was discovered on the sun, whence its name, and technetium was discovered in certain cool stars. This, of course, permits us to make headway in understanding the stars, because they are made of the same kinds of atoms which are on the earth. Now we know a great deal about the atoms, especially concerning their behavior under conditions of high temperature but not very great density, so that we can analyze by statistical mechanics the behavior of the stellar substance. Even though we cannot reproduce the conditions on the earth, using the basic physical laws we often can tell precisely, or very closely, what will happen. So it is that physics aids astronomy. Strange as it may seem, we understand the distribution of matter in the interior of the sun far better than we understand the interior of the earth. What goes on inside a star is better understood than one might guess from the difficulty of having to look at a little dot of light through a telescope, because we can calculate what the atoms in the stars should do in most circumstances.

One of the most impressive discoveries was the origin of the energy of the stars, that makes them continue to burn. One of the men who discovered this was out with his girlfriend the night after he realized that nuclear reactions must be going on in the stars in order to make them shine. She said “Look at how pretty the stars shine!” He said “Yes, and right now I am the only man in the world who knows why they shine.” She merely laughed at him. She was not impressed with being out with the only man who, at that moment, knew why stars shine. Well, it is sad to be alone, but that is the way it is in this world.

It is the nuclear “burning” of hydrogen which supplies the energy of the sun; the hydrogen is converted into helium. Furthermore, ultimately, the manufacture of various chemical elements proceeds in the centers of the stars, from hydrogen. The stuff of which we are made, was “cooked” once, in a star, and spit out. How do we know? Because there is a clue. The proportion of the different isotopes—how much C12
, how much C13
, etc., is something which is never changed by chemical reactions, because the chemical reactions are so much the same for the two. The proportions are purely the result of nuclear reactions. By looking at the proportions of the isotopes in the cold, dead ember which we are, we can discover what the furnace was like in which the stuff of which we are made was formed. That furnace was like the stars, and so it is very likely that our elements were “made” in the stars and spit out in the explosions which we call novae and supernovae. Astronomy is so close to physics that we shall study many astronomical things as we go along.

3–5Geology
We turn now to what are called earth sciences, or geology. First, meteorology and the weather. Of course the instruments of meteorology are physical instruments, and the development of experimental physics made these instruments possible, as was explained before. However, the theory of meteorology has never been satisfactorily worked out by the physicist. “Well,” you say, “there is nothing but air, and we know the equations of the motions of air.” Yes we do. “So if we know the condition of air today, why can’t we figure out the condition of the air tomorrow?” First, we do not really know what the condition is today, because the air is swirling and twisting everywhere. It turns out to be very sensitive, and even unstable. If you have ever seen water run smoothly over a dam, and then turn into a large number of blobs and drops as it falls, you will understand what I mean by unstable. You know the condition of the water before it goes over the spillway; it is perfectly smooth; but the moment it begins to fall, where do the drops begin? What determines how big the lumps are going to be and where they will be? That is not known, because the water is unstable. Even a smooth moving mass of air, in going over a mountain turns into complex whirlpools and eddies. In many fields we find this situation of turbulent flow that we cannot analyze today. Quickly we leave the subject of weather, and discuss geology!

The question basic to geology is, what makes the earth the way it is? The most obvious processes are in front of your very eyes, the erosion processes of the rivers, the winds, etc. It is easy enough to understand these, but for every bit of erosion there is an equal amount of something else going on. Mountains are no lower today, on the average, than they were in the past. There must be mountain-forming processes. You will find, if you study geology, that there are mountain-forming processes and volcanism, which nobody understands but which is half of geology. The phenomenon of volcanoes is really not understood. What makes an earthquake is, ultimately, not understood. It is understood that if something is pushing something else, it snaps and will slide—that is all right. But what pushes, and why? The theory is that there are currents inside the earth—circulating currents, due to the difference in temperature inside and outside—which, in their motion, push the surface slightly. Thus if there are two opposite circulations next to each other, the matter will collect in the region where they meet and make belts of mountains which are in unhappy stressed conditions, and so produce volcanoes and earthquakes.

What about the inside of the earth? A great deal is known about the speed of earthquake waves through the earth and the density of distribution of the earth. However, physicists have been unable to get a good theory as to how dense a substance should be at the pressures that would be expected at the center of the earth. In other words, we cannot figure out the properties of matter very well in these circumstances. We do much less well with the earth than we do with the conditions of matter in the stars. The mathematics involved seems a little too difficult, so far, but perhaps it will not be too long before someone realizes that it is an important problem, and really works it out. The other aspect, of course, is that even if we did know the density, we cannot figure out the circulating currents. Nor can we really work out the properties of rocks at high pressure. We cannot tell how fast the rocks should “give”; that must all be worked out by experiment.

3–6Psychology
Next, we consider the science of psychology. Incidentally, psychoanalysis is not a science: it is at best a medical process, and perhaps even more like witch-doctoring. It has a theory as to what causes disease—lots of different “spirits,” etc. The witch doctor has a theory that a disease like malaria is caused by a spirit which comes into the air; it is not cured by shaking a snake over it, but quinine does help malaria. So, if you are sick, I would advise that you go to the witch doctor because he is the man in the tribe who knows the most about the disease; on the other hand, his knowledge is not science. Psychoanalysis has not been checked carefully by experiment, and there is no way to find a list of the number of cases in which it works, the number of cases in which it does not work, etc.

The other branches of psychology, which involve things like the physiology of sensation—what happens in the eye, and what happens in the brain—are, if you wish, less interesting. But some small but real progress has been made in studying them. One of the most interesting technical problems may or may not be called psychology. The central problem of the mind, if you will, or the nervous system, is this: when an animal learns something, it can do something different than it could before, and its brain cell must have changed too, if it is made out of atoms. In what way is it different? We do not know where to look, or what to look for, when something is memorized. We do not know what it means, or what change there is in the nervous system, when a fact is learned. This is a very important problem which has not been solved at all. Assuming, however, that there is some kind of memory thing, the brain is such an enormous mass of interconnecting wires and nerves that it probably cannot be analyzed in a straightforward manner. There is an analog of this to computing machines and computing elements, in that they also have a lot of lines, and they have some kind of element, analogous, perhaps, to the synapse, or connection of one nerve to another. This is a very interesting subject which we have not the time to discuss further—the relationship between thinking and computing machines. It must be appreciated, of course, that this subject will tell us very little about the real complexities of ordinary human behavior. All human beings are so different. It will be a long time before we get there. We must start much further back. If we could even figure out how a dog works, we would have gone pretty far. Dogs are easier to understand, but nobody yet knows how dogs work.

3–7How did it get that way?
In order for physics to be useful to other sciences in a theoretical way, other than in the invention of instruments, the science in question must supply to the physicist a description of the object in a physicist’s language. They can say “why does a frog jump?,” and the physicist cannot answer. If they tell him what a frog is, that there are so many molecules, there is a nerve here, etc., that is different. If they will tell us, more or less, what the earth or the stars are like, then we can figure it out. In order for physical theory to be of any use, we must know where the atoms are located. In order to understand the chemistry, we must know exactly what atoms are present, for otherwise we cannot analyze it. That is but one limitation, of course.

There is another kind of problem in the sister sciences which does not exist in physics; we might call it, for lack of a better term, the historical question. How did it get that way? If we understand all about biology, we will want to know how all the things which are on the earth got there. There is the theory of evolution, an important part of biology. In geology, we not only want to know how the mountains are forming, but how the entire earth was formed in the beginning, the origin of the solar system, etc. That, of course, leads us to want to know what kind of matter there was in the world. How did the stars evolve? What were the initial conditions? That is the problem of astronomical history. A great deal has been found out about the formation of stars, the formation of elements from which we were made, and even a little about the origin of the universe.

There is no historical question being studied in physics at the present time. We do not have a question, “Here are the laws of physics, how did they get that way?” We do not imagine, at the moment, that the laws of physics are somehow changing with time, that they were different in the past than they are at present. Of course they may be, and the moment we find they are, the historical question of physics will be wrapped up with the rest of the history of the universe, and then the physicist will be talking about the same problems as astronomers, geologists, and biologists.

Finally, there is a physical problem that is common to many fields, that is very old, and that has not been solved. It is not the problem of finding new fundamental particles, but something left over from a long time ago—over a hundred years. Nobody in physics has really been able to analyze it mathematically satisfactorily in spite of its importance to the sister sciences. It is the analysis of circulating or turbulent fluids. If we watch the evolution of a star, there comes a point where we can deduce that it is going to start convection, and thereafter we can no longer deduce what should happen. A few million years later the star explodes, but we cannot figure out the reason. We cannot analyze the weather. We do not know the patterns of motions that there should be inside the earth. The simplest form of the problem is to take a pipe that is very long and push water through it at high speed. We ask: to push a given amount of water through that pipe, how much pressure is needed? No one can analyze it from first principles and the properties of water. If the water flows very slowly, or if we use a thick goo like honey, then we can do it nicely. You will find that in your textbook. What we really cannot do is deal with actual, wet water running through a pipe. That is the central problem which we ought to solve some day, and we have not.

A poet once said, “The whole universe is in a glass of wine.” We will probably never know in what sense he meant that, for poets do not write to be understood. But it is true that if we look at a glass of wine closely enough we see the entire universe. There are the things of physics: the twisting liquid which evaporates depending on the wind and weather, the reflections in the glass, and our imagination adds the atoms. The glass is a distillation of the earth’s rocks, and in its composition we see the secrets of the universe’s age, and the evolution of stars. What strange array of chemicals are in the wine? How did they come to be? There are the ferments, the enzymes, the substrates, and the products. There in wine is found the great generalization: all life is fermentation. Nobody can discover the chemistry of wine without discovering, as did Louis Pasteur, the cause of much disease. How vivid is the claret, pressing its existence into the consciousness that watches it! If our small minds, for some convenience, divide this glass of wine, this universe, into parts—physics, biology, geology, astronomy, psychology, and so on—remember that nature does not know it! So let us put it all back together, not forgetting ultimately what it is for. Let it give us one more final pleasure: drink it and forget it all!



=== CHAPTER 22 : ALGEBRA ===



22–1Addition and multiplication
In our study of oscillating systems we shall have occasion to use one of the most remarkable, almost astounding, formulas in all of mathematics. From the physicist’s point of view we could bring forth this formula in two minutes or so, and be done with it. But science is as much for intellectual enjoyment as for practical utility, so instead of just spending a few minutes on this amazing jewel, we shall surround the jewel by its proper setting in the grand design of that branch of mathematics which is called elementary algebra.

Now you may ask, “What is mathematics doing in a physics lecture?” We have several possible excuses: first, of course, mathematics is an important tool, but that would only excuse us for giving the formula in two minutes. On the other hand, in theoretical physics we discover that all our laws can be written in mathematical form; and that this has a certain simplicity and beauty about it. So, ultimately, in order to understand nature it may be necessary to have a deeper understanding of mathematical relationships. But the real reason is that the subject is enjoyable, and although we humans cut nature up in different ways, and we have different courses in different departments, such compartmentalization is really artificial, and we should take our intellectual pleasures where we find them.

Another reason for looking more carefully at algebra now, even though most of us studied algebra in high school, is that that was the first time we studied it; all the equations were unfamiliar, and it was hard work, just as physics is now. Every so often it is a great pleasure to look back to see what territory has been covered, and what the great map or plan of the whole thing is. Perhaps some day somebody in the Mathematics Department will present a lecture on mechanics in such a way as to show what it was we were trying to learn in the physics course!

The subject of algebra will not be developed from the point of view of a mathematician, exactly, because the mathematicians are mainly interested in how various mathematical facts are demonstrated, and how many assumptions are absolutely required, and what is not required. They are not so interested in the result of what they prove. For example, we may find the Pythagorean theorem quite interesting, that the sum of the squares of the sides of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse; that is an interesting fact, a curiously simple thing, which may be appreciated without discussing the question of how to prove it, or what axioms are required. So, in the same spirit, we shall describe qualitatively, if we may put it that way, the system of elementary algebra. We say elementary algebra because there is a branch of mathematics called modern algebra in which some of the rules such as ab=ba
, are abandoned, and it is still called algebra, but we shall not discuss that.

To discuss this subject we start in the middle. We suppose that we already know what integers are, what zero is, and what it means to increase a number by one unit. You may say, “That is not in the middle!” But it is the middle from a mathematical standpoint, because we could go even further back and describe the theory of sets in order to derive some of these properties of integers. But we are not going in that direction, the direction of mathematical philosophy and mathematical logic, but rather in the other direction, from the assumption that we know what integers are and we know how to count.

If we start with a certain number a
, an integer, and we count successively one unit b
 times, the number we arrive at we call a+b
, and that defines addition of integers.

Once we have defined addition, then we can consider this: if we start with nothing and add a
 to it, b
 times in succession, we call the result multiplication of integers; we call it b
 times a
.

Now we can also have a succession of multiplications: if we start with 1
 and multiply by a
, b
 times in succession, we call that raising to a power: ab
.

Now as a consequence of these definitions it can be easily shown that all of the following relationships are true:
(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)(i)(j)(k)a+b=b+aa+(b+c)=(a+b)+cab=baa(b+c)=ab+ac(ab)c=a(bc)(ab)c=acbcabac=a(b+c)(ab)c=a(bc)a+0=aa⋅1=aa1=a(22.1)
 
These results are well known and we shall not belabor the point, we merely list them. Of course, 1
 and 0
 have special properties; for example, a+0
 is a
, a
 times 1=a
, and a
 to the first power is a
.

In this discussion we must also assume a few other properties like continuity and ordering, which are very hard to define; we will let the rigorous theory do it. Furthermore, it is definitely true that we have written down too many “rules”; some of them may be deducible from the others, but we shall not worry about such matters.

22–2The inverse operations
In addition to the direct operations of addition, multiplication, and raising to a power, we have also the inverse operations, which are defined as follows. Let us assume that a
 and c
 are given, and that we wish to find what values of b
 satisfy such equations as a+b=c
, ab=c
, ba=c
. If a+b=c
, b
 is defined as c−a
, which is called subtraction. The operation called division is also clear: if ab=c
, then b=c/a
 defines division—a solution of the equation ab=c
 “backwards.” Now if we have a power ba=c
 and we ask ourselves, “What is b
?,” it is called the a
th root of c
: b=c√a
. For instance, if we ask ourselves the following question, “What integer, raised to the third power, equals 8
?,” then the answer is called the cube root of 8
; it is 2
. Because ba
 and ab
 are not equal, there are two inverse problems associated with powers, and the other inverse problem would be, “To what power must we raise 2
 to get 8
?” This is called taking the logarithm. If ab=c
, we write b=logac
. The fact that it has a cumbersome notation relative to the others does not mean that it is any less elementary, at least applied to integers, than the other processes. Although logarithms come late in an algebra class, in practice they are, of course, just as simple as roots; they are just a different kind of solution of an algebraic equation. The direct and inverse operations are summarized as follows:
(a)(b)(c)(d)additiona+b=cmultiplicationab=cpowerba=cpowerab=c(a′)(b′)(c′)(d′)subtractionb=c−adivisionb=c/arootb=c√alogarithmb=logac(22.2)
 

Now here is the idea. These relationships, or rules, are correct for integers, since they follow from the definitions of addition, multiplication, and raising to a power. We are going to discuss whether or not we can broaden the class of objects which a
, b
, and c
 represent so that they will obey these same rules, although the processes for a+b
, and so on, will not be definable in terms of the direct action of adding 1
, for instance, or successive multiplications by integers.

22–3Abstraction and generalization
When we try to solve simple algebraic equations using all these definitions, we soon discover some insoluble problems, such as the following. Suppose that we try to solve the equation b=3−5
. That means, according to our definition of subtraction, that we must find a number which, when added to 5
, gives 3
. And of course there is no such number, because we consider only positive integers; this is an insoluble problem. However, the plan, the great idea, is this: abstraction and generalization. From the whole structure of algebra, rules plus integers, we abstract the original definitions of addition and multiplication, but we leave the rules (22.1) and (22.2), and assume these to be true in general on a wider class of numbers, even though they are originally derived on a smaller class. Thus, rather than using integers symbolically to define the rules, we use the rules as the definition of the symbols, which then represent a more general kind of number. As an example, by working with the rules alone we can show that 3−5=0−2
. In fact we can show that one can make all subtractions, provided we define a whole set of new numbers: 0−1
, 0−2
, 0−3
, 0−4
, and so on, called the negative integers. Then we may use all the other rules, like a(b+c)=ab+ac
 and so forth, to find what the rules are for multiplying negative numbers, and we will discover, in fact, that all of the rules can be maintained with negative as well as positive integers.

So we have increased the range of objects over which the rules work, but the meaning of the symbols is different.

One cannot say, for instance, that −2
 times 5
 really means to add 5
 together successively −2
 times. That means nothing. But nevertheless everything will work out all right according to the rules.

An interesting problem comes up in taking powers. Suppose that we wish to discover what a(3−5)
 means. We know only that 3−5
 is a solution of the problem, (3−5)+5=3
. Knowing that, we know that a(3−5)a5=a3
. Therefore a(3−5)=a3/a5
, by the definition of division. With a little more work, this can be reduced to 1/a2
. So we find that the negative powers are the reciprocals of the positive powers, but 1/a2
 is a meaningless symbol, because if a
 is a positive or negative integer, the square of it can be greater than 1
, and we do not yet know what we mean by 1
 divided by a number greater than 1
!

Onward! The great plan is to continue the process of generalization; whenever we find another problem that we cannot solve we extend our realm of numbers. Consider division: we cannot find a number which is an integer, even a negative integer, which is equal to the result of dividing 3
 by 5
. But if we suppose that all fractional numbers also satisfy the rules, then we can talk about multiplying and adding fractions, and everything works as well as it did before.

Take another example of powers: what is a3/5
? We know only that (3/5)5=3
, since that was the definition of 3/5
. So we know also that (a(3/5))5=
 a(3/5)(5)=
 a3
, because this is one of the rules. Then by the definition of roots we find that a(3/5)=a3−−√5
.

In this way, then, we can define what we mean by putting fractions in the various symbols, by using the rules themselves to help us determine the definition—it is not arbitrary. It is a remarkable fact that all the rules still work for positive and negative integers, as well as for fractions!

We go on in the process of generalization. Are there any other equations we cannot solve? Yes, there are. For example, it is impossible to solve this equation: b=
 21/2=
 2–√
. It is impossible to find a number which is rational (a fraction) whose square is equal to 2
. It is very easy for us in modern days to answer this question. We know the decimal system, and so we have no difficulty in appreciating the meaning of an unending decimal as a type of approximation to the square root of 2
. Historically, this idea presented great difficulty to the Greeks. To really define precisely what is meant here requires that we add some substance of continuity and ordering, and it is, in fact, quite the most difficult step in the processes of generalization just at this point. It was made, formally and rigorously, by Dedekind. However, without worrying about the mathematical rigor of the thing, it is quite easy to understand that what we mean is that we are going to find a whole sequence of approximate fractions, perfect fractions (because any decimal, when stopped somewhere, is of course rational), which just keeps on going, getting closer and closer to the desired result. That is good enough for what we wish to discuss, and it permits us to involve ourselves in irrational numbers, and to calculate things like the square root of 2
 to any accuracy that we desire, with enough work.

22–4Approximating irrational numbers
The next problem comes with what happens with the irrational powers. Suppose that we want to define, for instance, 102√
. In principle, the answer is simple enough. If we approximate the square root of 2
 to a certain number of decimal places, then the power is rational, and we can take the approximate root, using the above method, and get an approximation to 102√
. Then we may run it up a few more decimal places (it is again rational), take the appropriate root, this time a much higher root because there is a much bigger denominator in the fraction, and get a better approximation. Of course we are going to get some enormously high roots involved here, and the work is quite difficult. How can we cope with this problem?

In the computations of square roots, cube roots, and other small roots, there is an arithmetical process available by which we can get one decimal place after another. But the amount of labor needed to calculate irrational powers and the logarithms that go with them (the inverse problem) is so great that there is no simple arithmetical process we can use. Therefore tables have been built up which permit us to calculate these powers, and these are called the tables of logarithms, or the tables of powers, depending on which way the table is set up. It is merely a question of saving time; if we must raise some number to an irrational power, we can look it up rather than having to compute it. Of course, such a computation is just a technical problem, but it is an interesting one, and of great historical value. In the first place, not only do we have the problem of solving x=102√
, but we also have the problem of solving 10x=2
, or x=log102
. This is not a problem where we have to define a new kind of number for the result, it is merely a computational problem. The answer is simply an irrational number, an unending decimal, not a new kind of a number.

Let us now discuss the problem of calculating solutions of such equations. The general idea is really very simple. If we could calculate 101
, and 104/10
, and 101/100
, and 104/1000
 and so on, and multiply them all together, we would get 101.414…
 or 102√
, and that is the general idea on which things work. But instead of calculating 101/10
 and so on, we shall calculate 101/2
, 101/4
, and so on. Before we start, we should explain why we make so much work with 10
, instead of some other number. Of course, we realize that logarithm tables are of great practical utility, quite aside from the mathematical problem of taking roots, since with any base at all,
logb(ac)=logba+logbc.(22.3)
We are all familiar with the fact that one can use this fact in a practical way to multiply numbers if we have a table of logarithms. The only question is, with what base b
 shall we compute? It makes no difference what base is used; we can use the same principle all the time, and if we are using logarithms to any particular base, we can find logarithms to any other base merely by a change in scale, a multiplying factor. If we multiply Eq. (22.3) by 61
, it is just as true, and if we had a table of logs with a base b
, and somebody else multiplied all of our table by 61
, there would be no essential difference. Suppose that we know the logarithms of all the numbers to the base b
. In other words, we can solve the equation ba=c
 for any c
 because we have a table. The problem is to find the logarithm of the same number c
 to some other base, let us say the base x
. We would like to solve xa′=c
. It is easy to do, because we can always write x=bt
, which defines t
, knowing x
 and b
. As a matter of fact, t=logbx
. Then if we put that in and solve for a′
, we see that (bt)a′=ba′t=c
. In other words, ta′
 is the logarithm of c
 in base b
. Thus a′=a/t
. Thus logs to base x
 are just 1/t
, which is a constant, times the logs to the base, b
. Therefore any log table is equivalent to any other log table if we multiply by a constant, and the constant is 1/logbx
. This permits us to choose a particular base, and for convenience we take the base 10
. (The question may arise as to whether there is any natural base, any base in which things are somehow simpler, and we shall try to find an answer to that later. At the moment we shall just use the base 10
.)

Table 22–1
Successive Square Roots of Ten
Power s
1024s
10s
(10s−1)/s
1
1024
10.00000
9.00
1/2
512
3.16228
4.32
1/4
256
1.77828
3.113
1/8
128
1.33352
2.668
1/16
64
1.15478
2.476
1/32
32
1.074607
2.3874
1/64
16
1.036633
2.3445
1/128
8
1.018152
2.3234211
1/256
4
1.0090350
2.3130104
1/512
2
1.0045073
2.307753
1/1024
1
1.0022511
2.305126
⏐↓⏐26
Δ/1024
Δ
1+0.0022486Δ←−−
¯¯¯¯¯2.3025
(Δ→0)
Now let us see how to calculate logarithms. We begin by computing successive square roots of 10
, by cut and try. The results are shown in Table 22–1. The powers of 10
 are given in the first column, and the result, 10s
, is given in the third column. Thus 101=10
. The one-half power of 10
 we can easily work out, because that is the square root of 10
, and there is a known, simple process for taking square roots of any number.1 Using this process, we find the first square root to be 3.16228
. What good is that? It already tells us something, it tells us how to take 100.5
, so we now know at least one logarithm, if we happen to need the logarithm of 3.16228
, we know the answer is close to 0.50000
. But we must do a little bit better than that; we clearly need more information. So we take the square root again, and find 101/4
, which is 1.77828
. Now we have the logarithm of more numbers than we had before, 1.250
 is the logarithm of 17.78
 and, incidentally, if it happens that somebody asks for 100.75
, we can get it, because that is 10(0.5+0.25)
; it is therefore the product of the second and third numbers. If we can get enough numbers in column s
 to be able to make up almost any number, then by multiplying the proper things in column 3, we can get 10
 to any power; that is the plan. So we evaluate ten successive square roots of 10
, and that is the main work which is involved in the calculations.

Why don’t we keep on going for more and more accuracy? Because we begin to notice something. When we raise 10
 to a very small power, we get 1
 plus a small amount. The reason for this is clear, because we are going to have to take the 1000
th power of 101/1000
 to get back to 10
, so we had better not start with too big a number; it has to be close to 1
. What we notice is that the small numbers that are added to 1
 begin to look as though we are merely dividing by 2
 each time; we see 1815
 becomes 903
, then 450
, 225
; so it is clear that, to an excellent approximation, if we take another root, we shall get 1.00112
 something, and rather than actually take all the square roots, we guess at the ultimate limit. When we take a small fraction Δ/1024
 as Δ
 approaches zero, what will the answer be? Of course it will be some number close to 1+0.0022511Δ
. Not exactly 1+0.0022511Δ
, however—we can get a better value by the following trick: we subtract the 1
, and then divide by the power s
. This ought to correct all the excesses to the same value. We see that they are very closely equal. At the top of the table they are not equal, but as they come down, they get closer and closer to a constant value. What is the value? Again we look to see how the series is going, how it has changed with s
. It changed by 211
, by 104
, by 53
, by 26
. These changes are obviously half of each other, very closely, as we go down. Therefore, if we kept going, the changes would be 13
, 7
, 3
, 2
 and 1
, more or less, or a total of 26
. Thus we have only 26
 more to go, and so we find that the true number is 2.3025
. (Actually, we shall later see that the exact number should be 2.3026
, but to keep it realistic, we shall not alter anything in the arithmetic.) From this table we can now calculate any power of 10
, by compounding the power out of 1024
ths.

Let us now actually calculate a logarithm, because the process we shall use is where logarithm tables actually come from. The procedure is shown in Table 22–2, and the numerical values are shown in Table 22–1 (columns 2 and 3).

Table 22–2
Calculation of a logarithm: log102
2÷1.77828=1.124682
1.124682÷1.074607=1.046598
, etc.
∴
2=(1.77828)(1.074607)(1.036633)(1.0090350)(1.000573)
=10[11024(256+32+16+4+0.254)]=10[308.2541024]
=100.30103(5732249=0.254)
∴
log102=0.30103
Suppose we want the logarithm of 2
. That is, we want to know to what power we must raise 10
 to get 2
. Can we raise 10
 to the 1/2
 power? No; that is too big. In other words, we can see that the answer is going to be bigger than 1/4
, and less than 1/2
. Let us take the factor 101/4
 out; we divide 2
 by 1.778…
, and get 1.124…
, and so on, and now we know that we have taken away 0.250000
 from the logarithm. The number 1.124…
, is now the number whose logarithm we need. When we are finished we shall add back the 1/4
, or 256/1024
. Now we look in the table for the next number just below 1.124…
, and that is 1.074607
. We therefore divide by 1.074607
 and get 1.046598
. From that we discover that 2
 can be made up of a product of numbers that are in Table 22–1, as follows:
2=(1.77828)(1.074607)(1.036633)×(1.0090350)(1.000573).
There was one factor (1.000573)
 left over, naturally, which is beyond the range of our table. To get the logarithm of this factor, we use our result that 10Δ/1024≈1+2.3025Δ/1024
. We find Δ=0.254
. Therefore our answer is 10
 to the following power: (256+32+16+4+0.254)/1024
. Adding those together, we get 308.254/1024
. Dividing, we get 0.30103
, so we know that the log102=0.30103
, which happens to be right to 5
 figures!

This is how logarithms were originally computed by Mr. Briggs of Halifax, in 1620. He said, “I computed successively 54
 square roots of 10
.” We know he really computed only the first 27
, because the rest of them can be obtained by this trick with Δ
. His work involved calculating the square root of 10
 twenty-seven times, which is not much more than the ten times we did; however, it was more work because he calculated to sixteen decimal places, and then reduced his answer to fourteen when he published it, so that there were no rounding errors. He made tables of logarithms to fourteen decimal places by this method, which is quite tedious. But all logarithm tables for three hundred years were borrowed from Mr. Briggs’ tables by reducing the number of decimal places. Only in modern times, with the WPA and computing machines, have new tables been independently computed. There are much more efficient methods of computing logarithms today, using certain series expansions.

In the above process, we discovered something rather interesting, and that is that for very small powers ϵ
 we can calculate 10ϵ
 easily; we have discovered that 10ϵ=1+2.3025ϵ
, by sheer numerical analysis. Of course this also means that 10n/2.3025=1+n
 if n
 is very small. Now logarithms to any other base are merely multiples of logarithms to the base 10
. The base 10
 was used only because we have 10
 fingers, and the arithmetic of it is easy, but if we ask for a mathematically natural base, one that has nothing to do with the number of fingers on human beings, we might try to change our scale of logarithms in some convenient and natural manner, and the method which people have chosen is to redefine the logarithms by multiplying all the logarithms to the base 10
 by 2.3025…
 This then corresponds to using some other base, and this is called the natural base, or base e
. Note that loge(1+n)≈n
, or en≈1+n
 as n→0
.

It is easy enough to find out what e
 is: e=101/2.3025…
 or 100.434310…
, an irrational power. Our table of the successive square roots of 10
 can be used to compute, not just logarithms, but also 10
 to any power, so let us use it to calculate this natural base e
. For convenience we transform 0.434310…
 into 444.73/1024
. Now, 444.73
 is 256+128+32+16+8+4+0.73
. Therefore e
, since it is an exponent of a sum, will be a product of the numbers
(1.77828)(1.33352)(1.074607)(1.036633)×(1.018152)(1.009035)(1.001643)=2.7184.
(The only problem is the last one, which is 0.73
, and which is not in the table, but we know that if Δ
 is small enough, the answer is 1+0.0022486Δ
.) When we multiply all these together, we get 2.7184
 (it should be 2.7183
, but it is good enough). The use of such tables, then, is the way in which irrational powers and the logarithms of irrational numbers are all calculated. That takes care of the irrationals.

22–5Complex numbers
Now it turns out that after all that work we still cannot solve every equation! For instance, what is the square root of −1
? Suppose we have to find x2=−1
. The square of no rational, of no irrational, of nothing that we have discovered so far, is equal to −1
. So we again have to generalize our numbers to a still wider class. Let us suppose that a specific solution of x2=−1
 is called something, we shall call it i
; i
 has the property, by definition, that its square is −1
. That is about all we are going to say about it; of course, there is more than one root of the equation x2=−1
. Someone could write i
, but another could say, “No, I prefer −i
. My i
 is minus your i
.” It is just as good a solution, and since the only definition that i
 has is that i2=−1
, it must be true that any equation we can write is equally true if the sign of i
 is changed everywhere. This is called taking the complex conjugate. Now we are going to make up numbers by adding successive i
’s, and multiplying i
’s by numbers, and adding other numbers, and so on, according to all of our rules. In this way we find that numbers can all be written in the form p+iq
, where p
 and q
 are what we call real numbers, i.e., the numbers we have been defining up until now. The number i
 is called the unit imaginary number. Any real multiple of i
 is called pure imaginary. The most general number, a
, is of the form p+iq
 and is called a complex number. Things do not get any worse if, for instance, we multiply two such numbers, let us say (r+is)(p+iq)
. Then, using the rules, we get
(r+is)(p+iq)=rp+r(iq)+(is)p+(is)(iq)=rp+i(rq)+i(sp)+(ii)(sq)=(rp−sq)+i(rq+sp),(22.4)
since ii=
 i2=
 −1
. Therefore all the numbers that now belong in the rules (22.1) have this mathematical form.

Now you say, “This can go on forever! We have defined powers of imaginaries and all the rest, and when we are all finished, somebody else will come along with another equation which cannot be solved, like x6+3x2=−2
. Then we have to generalize all over again!” But it turns out that with this one more invention, just the square root of −1
, every algebraic equation can be solved! This is a fantastic fact, which we must leave to the Mathematics Department to prove. The proofs are very beautiful and very interesting, but certainly not self-evident. In fact, the most obvious supposition is that we are going to have to invent again and again and again. But the greatest miracle of all is that we do not. This is the last invention. After this invention of complex numbers, we find that the rules still work with complex numbers, and we are finished inventing new things. We can find the complex power of any complex number, we can solve any equation that is written algebraically, in terms of a finite number of those symbols. We do not find any new numbers. The square root of i
, for instance, has a definite result, it is not something new; and ii
 is something. We will discuss that now.

We have already discussed multiplication, and addition is also easy; if we add two complex numbers, (p+iq)+(r+is)
, the answer is (p+r)+i(q+s)
. Now we can add and multiply complex numbers. But the real problem, of course, is to compute complex powers of complex numbers. It turns out that the problem is actually no more difficult than computing complex powers of real numbers. So let us concentrate now on the problem of calculating 10
 to a complex power, not just an irrational power, but 10(r+is)
. Of course, we must at all times use our rules (22.1) and (22.2). Thus
10(r+is)=10r10is.(22.5)
But 10r
 we already know how to compute, and we can always multiply anything by anything else; therefore the problem is to compute only 10is
. Let us call it some complex number, x+iy
. Problem: given s
, find x
, find y
. Now if
10is=x+iy,
then the complex conjugate of this equation must also be true, so that
10−is=x−iy.
(Thus we see that we can deduce a number of things without actually computing anything, by using our rules.) We deduce another interesting thing by multiplying these together:
10is10−is=100=1=(x+iy)(x−iy)=x2+y2.(22.6)
 
Thus if we find x
, we have y
 also.

Now the problem is how to compute 10
 to an imaginary power. What guide is there? We may work over our rules until we can go no further, but here is a reasonable guide: if we can compute it for any particular s
, we can get it for all the rest. If we know 10is
 for any one s
 and then we want it for twice that s
, we can square the number, and so on. But how can we find 10is
 for even one special value of s
? To do so we shall make one additional assumption, which is not quite in the category of all the other rules, but which leads to reasonable results and permits us to make progress: when the power is small, we shall suppose that the “law” 10ϵ=1+2.3025ϵ
 is right, as ϵ
 gets very small, not only for real ϵ
, but for complex ϵ
 as well. Therefore, we begin with the supposition that this law is true in general, and that tells us that 10is=1+2.3025⋅is
, for s→0
. So we assume that if s
 is very small, say one part in 1024
, we have a rather good approximation to 10is
.

Now we make a table by which we can compute all the imaginary powers of 10
, that is, compute x
 and y
. It is done as follows. The first power we start with is the 1/1024
 power, which we presume is very nearly 1+2.3025i/1024
. Thus we start with
10i/1024=1.00000+0.0022486i,(22.7)
and if we keep multiplying the number by itself, we can get to a higher imaginary power. In fact, we may just reverse the procedure we used in making our logarithm table, and calculate the square, 4
th power, 8
th power, etc., of (22.7), and thus build up the values shown in Table 22–3. We notice an interesting thing, that the x
 numbers are positive at first, but then swing negative. We shall look into that a little bit more in a moment. But first we may be curious to find for what number s
 the real part of 10is
 is zero. The y
-value would be 1
, and so we would have 10is=1i
, or is=log10i
. As an example of how to use this table, just as we calculated log102
 before, let us now use Table 22–3 to find log10i
.

Table 22–3
Successive Squares of 10i/1024=1+0.0022486i
Power is
1024s
10is
i/1024
1
1.00000+0.00225i
*
i/512
2
1.00000+0.00450i
i/256
4
0.99996+0.00900i
i/128
8
0.99984+0.01800i
i/64
16
0.99936+0.03599i
i/32
32
0.99742+0.07193i
i/16
64
0.98967+0.14349i
i/8
128
0.95885+0.28402i
i/4
256
0.83872+0.54467i
i/2
512
0.40679+0.91365i
i/1
1024
−0.66928+0.74332i
* Should be 0.0022486i
Which of the numbers in Table 22–3 do we have to multiply together to get a pure imaginary result? After a little trial and error, we discover that to reduce x
 the most, it is best to multiply “512
” by “128
.” This gives 0.13056+0.99159i
. Then we discover that we should multiply this by a number whose imaginary part is about equal to the size of the real part we are trying to remove. Thus we choose “64
” whose y
-value is 0.14349
, since that is closest to 0.13056
. This then gives −0.01308+1.00008i
. Now we have overshot, and must divide by 0.99996+0.00900i
. How do we do that? By changing the sign of i
 and multiplying by 0.99996−0.00900i
 (which works if x2+y2=1
). Continuing in this way, we find that the entire power to which 10
 must be raised to give i
 is i(512+128+64−4−2+0.20)/1024
, or 698.20i/1024
. If we raise 10
 to that power, we can get i
. Therefore log10i=0.68184i
.

22–6Imaginary exponents
Table 22–4
Successive Powers of 10i/8
p=
 power⋅8/i
10ip/8
0
1.00000+0.00000i
1
0.95882+0.28402i
2
0.83867+0.54465i
3
0.64944+0.76042i
4
0.40672+0.91356i
5
0.13050+0.99146i
6
−0.15647+0.98770i
7
−0.43055+0.90260i
8
−0.66917+0.74315i
9
−0.85268+0.52249i
10
−0.96596+0.25880i
11
−0.99969−0.02620i
12
−0.95104−0.30905i
14
−0.62928−0.77717i
16
−0.10447−0.99453i
18
+0.45454−0.89098i
20
+0.86648−0.49967i
22
+0.99884+0.05287i
24
+0.80890+0.58836i
To further investigate the subject of taking complex imaginary powers, let us look at the powers of 10
 taking successive powers, not doubling the power each time, in order to follow Table 22–3 further and to see what happens to those minus signs. This is shown in Table 22–4, in which we take 10i/8
, and just keep multiplying it. We see that x
 decreases, passes through zero, swings almost to −1
 (if we could get in between p=10
 and p=11
 it would obviously swing to −1
), and swings back. The y
-value is going back and forth too.


Figure 22–1
In Fig. 22–1 the dots represent the numbers that appear in Table 22–4, and the lines are just drawn to help you visually. So we see that the numbers x
 and y
 oscillate; 10is
 repeats itself, it is a periodic thing, and as such, it is easy enough to explain, because if a certain power is i
, then the fourth power of that would be i2
 squared. It would be +1
 again, and therefore, since 100.68i
 is equal to i
, by taking the fourth power we discover that 102.72i
 is equal to +1
. Therefore, if we wanted 103.00i
, for instance, we could write it as 102.72i
 times 100.28i
. In other words, it has a period, it repeats. Of course, we recognize what the curves look like! They look like the sine and cosine, and we shall call them, for a while, the algebraic sine and algebraic cosine. However, instead of using the base 10
, we shall put them into our natural base, which only changes the horizontal scale; so we denote 2.3025s
 by t
, and write 10is=eit
, where t
 is a real number. Now eit=x+iy
, and we shall write this as the algebraic cosine of t
 plus i
 times the algebraic sine of t
. Thus
eit=cos−−−t+isin−−−t.(22.8)
What are the properties of cos−−−t
 and sin−−−t
? First, we know, for instance, that x2+y2
 must be 1
; we have proved that before, and it is just as true for base e
 as for base 10
. Therefore cos−−−2t+sin−−−2t=1
. We also know that, for small t
, eit=1+it
, and therefore cos−−−t
 is nearly 1
, and sin−−−t
 is nearly t
, and so it goes, that all of the various properties of these remarkable functions, which come from taking imaginary powers, are the same as the sine and cosine of trigonometry.

Is the period the same? Let us find out. e
 to what power is equal to i
? What is the logarithm of i
 to the base e
? We worked it out before, in the base 10
 it was 0.68184i
, but when we change our logarithmic scale to e
, we have to multiply by 2.3025
, and if we do that it comes out 1.570
. So this will be called “algebraic π/2
.” But, we see, it differs from the regular π/2
 by only one place in the last point, and that, of course, is the result of errors in our arithmetic! So we have created two new functions in a purely algebraic manner, the cosine and the sine, which belong to algebra, and only to algebra. We wake up at the end to discover the very functions that are natural to geometry. So there is a connection, ultimately, between algebra and geometry.

We summarize with this, the most remarkable formula in mathematics:
eiθ=cosθ+isinθ.(22.9)
This is our jewel.

We may relate the geometry to the algebra by representing complex numbers in a plane; the horizontal position of a point is x
, the vertical position of a point is y
 (Fig. 22–2). We represent every complex number, x+iy
. Then if the radial distance to this point is called r
 and the angle is called θ
, the algebraic law is that x+iy
 is written in the form reiθ
, where the geometrical relationships between x
, y
, r
, and θ
 are as shown. This, then, is the unification of algebra and geometry.


Fig. 22–2.x+iy=reiθ
.
When we began this chapter, armed only with the basic notions of integers and counting, we had little idea of the power of the processes of abstraction and generalization. Using the set of algebraic “laws,” or properties of numbers, Eq. (22.1), and the definitions of inverse operations (22.2), we have been able here, ourselves, to manufacture not only numbers but useful things like tables of logarithms, powers, and trigonometric functions (for these are what the imaginary powers of real numbers are), all merely by extracting ten successive square roots of ten!

=== CHAPTER 26 : OPTICS THE PRINCIPLE OF LEAST TIME ===
26–1Light
This is the first of a number of chapters on the subject of electromagnetic radiation. Light, with which we see, is only one small part of a vast spectrum of the same kind of thing, the various parts of this spectrum being distinguished by different values of a certain quantity which varies. This variable quantity could be called the “wavelength.” As it varies in the visible spectrum, the light apparently changes color from red to violet. If we explore the spectrum systematically, from long wavelengths toward shorter ones, we would begin with what are usually called radiowaves. Radiowaves are technically available in a wide range of wavelengths, some even longer than those used in regular broadcasts; regular broadcasts have wavelengths corresponding to about 500
 meters. Then there are the so-called “short waves,” i.e., radar waves, millimeter waves, and so on. There are no actual boundaries between one range of wavelengths and another, because nature did not present us with sharp edges. The number associated with a given name for the waves are only approximate and, of course, so are the names we give to the different ranges.

Then, a long way down through the millimeter waves, we come to what we call the infrared, and thence to the visible spectrum. Then going in the other direction, we get into a region which is called the ultraviolet. Where the ultraviolet stops, the x-rays begin, but we cannot define precisely where this is; it is roughly at 10−8
 m, or 10−2
 μ
m. These are “soft” x-rays; then there are ordinary x-rays and very hard x-rays; then γ
-rays, and so on, for smaller and smaller values of this dimension called the wavelength.

Within this vast range of wavelengths, there are three or more regions of approximation which are especially interesting. In one of these, a condition exists in which the wavelengths involved are very small compared with the dimensions of the equipment available for their study; furthermore, the photon energies, using the quantum theory, are small compared with the energy sensitivity of the equipment. Under these conditions we can make a rough first approximation by a method called geometrical optics. If, on the other hand, the wavelengths are comparable to the dimensions of the equipment, which is difficult to arrange with visible light but easier with radiowaves, and if the photon energies are still negligibly small, then a very useful approximation can be made by studying the behavior of the waves, still disregarding the quantum mechanics. This method is based on the classical theory of electromagnetic radiation, which will be discussed in a later chapter. Next, if we go to very short wavelengths, where we can disregard the wave character but the photons have a very large energy compared with the sensitivity of our equipment, things get simple again. This is the simple photon picture, which we will describe only very roughly. The complete picture, which unifies the whole thing into one model, will not be available to us for a long time.

In this chapter our discussion is limited to the geometrical optics region, in which we forget about the wavelength and the photon character of the light, which will all be explained in due time. We do not even bother to say what the light is, but just find out how it behaves on a large scale compared with the dimensions of interest. All this must be said in order to emphasize the fact that what we are going to talk about is only a very crude approximation; this is one of the chapters that we shall have to “unlearn” again. But we shall very quickly unlearn it, because we shall almost immediately go on to a more accurate method.

Although geometrical optics is just an approximation, it is of very great importance technically and of great interest historically. We shall present this subject more historically than some of the others in order to give some idea of the development of a physical theory or physical idea.

First, light is, of course, familiar to everybody, and has been familiar since time immemorial. Now one problem is, by what process do we see light? There have been many theories, but it finally settled down to one, which is that there is something which enters the eye—which bounces off objects into the eye. We have heard that idea so long that we accept it, and it is almost impossible for us to realize that very intelligent men have proposed contrary theories—that something comes out of the eye and feels for the object, for example. Some other important observations are that, as light goes from one place to another, it goes in straight lines, if there is nothing in the way, and that the rays do not seem to interfere with one another. That is, light is crisscrossing in all directions in the room, but the light that is passing across our line of vision does not affect the light that comes to us from some object. This was once a most powerful argument against the corpuscular theory; it was used by Huygens. If light were like a lot of arrows shooting along, how could other arrows go through them so easily? Such philosophical arguments are not of much weight. One could always say that light is made up of arrows which go through each other!

26–2Reflection and refraction

Fig. 26–1.The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.
The discussion above gives enough of the basic idea of geometrical optics—now we have to go a little further into the quantitative features. Thus far we have light going only in straight lines between two points; now let us study the behavior of light when it hits various materials. The simplest object is a mirror, and the law for a mirror is that when the light hits the mirror, it does not continue in a straight line, but bounces off the mirror into a new straight line, which changes when we change the inclination of the mirror. The question for the ancients was, what is the relation between the two angles involved? This is a very simple relation, discovered long ago. The light striking a mirror travels in such a way that the two angles, between each beam and the mirror, are equal. For some reason it is customary to measure the angles from the normal to the mirror surface. Thus the so-called law of reflection is
θi=θr.(26.1)

That is a simple enough proposition, but a more difficult problem is encountered when light goes from one medium into another, for example from air into water; here also, we see that it does not go in a straight line. In the water the ray is at an inclination to its path in the air; if we change the angle θi
 so that it comes down more nearly vertically, then the angle of “breakage” is not as great. But if we tilt the beam of light at quite an angle, then the deviation angle is very large. The question is, what is the relation of one angle to the other? This also puzzled the ancients for a long time, and here they never found the answer! It is, however, one of the few places in all of Greek physics that one may find any experimental results listed. Claudius Ptolemy made a list of the angle in water for each of a number of different angles in air. Table 26–1 shows the angles in the air, in degrees, and the corresponding angle as measured in the water. (Ordinarily it is said that Greek scientists never did any experiments. But it would be impossible to obtain this table of values without knowing the right law, except by experiment. It should be noted, however, that these do not represent independent careful measurements for each angle but only some numbers interpolated from a few measurements, for they all fit perfectly on a parabola.)


Fig. 26–2.A light ray is refracted when it passes from one medium into another.
Table 26–1
Angle in air	Angle in water
10∘
8∘
20∘
15
-1/2∘
30∘
22
-1/2∘
40∘
29∘
50∘
35∘
60∘
40
-1/2∘
70∘
45
-1/2∘
80∘
50∘
This, then, is one of the important steps in the development of physical law: first we observe an effect, then we measure it and list it in a table; then we try to find the rule by which one thing can be connected with another. The above numerical table was made in 140 a.d., but it was not until 1621 that someone finally found the rule connecting the two angles! The rule, found by Willebrord Snell, a Dutch mathematician, is as follows: if θi
 is the angle in air and θr
 is the angle in the water, then it turns out that the sine of θi
 is equal to some constant multiple of the sine of θr
:
sinθi=nsinθr.(26.2)
For water the number n
 is approximately 1.33
. Equation (26.2) is called Snell’s law; it permits us to predict how the light is going to bend when it goes from air into water. Table 26–2 shows the angles in air and in water according to Snell’s law. Note the remarkable agreement with Ptolemy’s list.

Table 26–2
Angle in air	Angle in water
10∘
7
-1/2∘
20∘
15∘
30∘
22∘
40∘
29∘
50∘
35∘
60∘
40
-1/2∘
70∘
45∘
80∘
48∘
26–3Fermat’s principle of least time
Now in the further development of science, we want more than just a formula. First we have an observation, then we have numbers that we measure, then we have a law which summarizes all the numbers. But the real glory of science is that we can find a way of thinking such that the law is evident.

The first way of thinking that made the law about the behavior of light evident was discovered by Fermat in about 1650, and it is called the principle of least time, or Fermat’s principle. His idea is this: that out of all possible paths that it might take to get from one point to another, light takes the path which requires the shortest time.

Let us first show that this is true for the case of the mirror, that this simple principle contains both the law of straight-line propagation and the law for the mirror. So, we are growing in our understanding! Let us try to find the solution to the following problem. In Fig. 26–3 are shown two points, A
 and B
, and a plane mirror, MM′
. What is the way to get from A
 to B
 in the shortest time? The answer is to go straight from A
 to B
! But if we add the extra rule that the light has to strike the mirror and come back in the shortest time, the answer is not so easy. One way would be to go as quickly as possible to the mirror and then go to B
, on the path ADB
. Of course, we then have a long path DB
. If we move over a little to the right, to E
, we slightly increase the first distance, but we greatly decrease the second one, and so the total path length, and therefore the travel time, is less. How can we find the point C
 for which the time is the shortest? We can find it very nicely by a geometrical trick.


Fig. 26–3.Illustration of the principle of least time.
We construct on the other side of MM′
 an artificial point B′
, which is the same distance below the plane MM′
 as the point B
 is above the plane. Then we draw the line EB′
. Now because BFM
 is a right angle and BF=FB′
, EB
 is equal to EB′
. Therefore the sum of the two distances, AE+EB
, which is proportional to the time it will take if the light travels with constant velocity, is also the sum of the two lengths AE+EB′
. Therefore the problem becomes, when is the sum of these two lengths the least? The answer is easy: when the line goes through point C
 as a straight line from A
 to B′
! In other words, we have to find the point where we go toward the artificial point, and that will be the correct one. Now if ACB′
 is a straight line, then angle BCF
 is equal to angle B′CF
 and thence to angle ACM
. Thus the statement that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection is equivalent to the statement that the light goes to the mirror in such a way that it comes back to the point B
 in the least possible time. Originally, the statement was made by Hero of Alexandria that the light travels in such a way that it goes to the mirror and to the other point in the shortest possible distance, so it is not a modern theory. It was this that inspired Fermat to suggest to himself that perhaps refraction operated on a similar basis. But for refraction, light obviously does not use the path of shortest distance, so Fermat tried the idea that it takes the shortest time.

Before we go on to analyze refraction, we should make one more remark about the mirror. If we have a source of light at the point B
 and it sends light toward the mirror, then we see that the light which goes to A
 from the point B
 comes to A
 in exactly the same manner as it would have come to A
 if there were an object at B′
, and no mirror. Now of course the eye detects only the light which enters it physically, so if we have an object at B
 and a mirror which makes the light come into the eye in exactly the same manner as it would have come into the eye if the object were at B′
, then the eye-brain system interprets that, assuming it does not know too much, as being an object at B′
. So the illusion that there is an object behind the mirror is merely due to the fact that the light which is entering the eye is entering in exactly the same manner, physically, as it would have entered had there been an object back there (except for the dirt on the mirror, and our knowledge of the existence of the mirror, and so on, which is corrected in the brain).

Now let us demonstrate that the principle of least time will give Snell’s law of refraction. We must, however, make an assumption about the speed of light in water. We shall assume that the speed of light in water is lower than the speed of light in air by a certain factor, n
.


Fig. 26–4.Illustration of Fermat’s principle for refraction.
 
Fig. 26–5.The minimum time corresponds to point C
, but nearby points correspond to nearly the same time.
In Fig. 26–4, our problem is again to go from A
 to B
 in the shortest time. To illustrate that the best thing to do is not just to go in a straight line, let us imagine that a beautiful girl has fallen out of a boat, and she is screaming for help in the water at point B
. The line marked x
 is the shoreline. We are at point A
 on land, and we see the accident, and we can run and can also swim. But we can run faster than we can swim. What do we do? Do we go in a straight line? (Yes, no doubt!) However, by using a little more intelligence we would realize that it would be advantageous to travel a little greater distance on land in order to decrease the distance in the water, because we go so much slower in the water. (Following this line of reasoning out, we would say the right thing to do is to compute very carefully what should be done!) At any rate, let us try to show that the final solution to the problem is the path ACB
, and that this path takes the shortest time of all possible ones. If it is the shortest path, that means that if we take any other, it will be longer. So, if we were to plot the time it takes against the position of point X
, we would get a curve something like that shown in Fig. 26–5, where point C
 corresponds to the shortest of all possible times. This means that if we move the point X
 to points near C
, in the first approximation there is essentially no change in time because the slope is zero at the bottom of the curve. So our way of finding the law will be to consider that we move the place by a very small amount, and to demand that there be essentially no change in time. (Of course there is an infinitesimal change of a second order; we ought to have a positive increase for displacements in either direction from C
.) So we consider a nearby point X
 and we calculate how long it would take to go from A
 to B
 by the two paths, and compare the new path with the old path. It is very easy to do. We want the difference, of course, to be nearly zero if the distance XC
 is short. First, look at the path on land. If we draw a perpendicular XE
, we see that this path is shortened by the amount EC
. Let us say we gain by not having to go that extra distance. On the other hand, in the water, by drawing a corresponding perpendicular, CF
, we find that we have to go the extra distance XF
, and that is what we lose. Or, in time, we gain the time it would have taken to go the distance EC
, but we lose the time it would have taken to go the distance XF
. Those times must be equal since, in the first approximation, there is to be no change in time. But supposing that in the water the speed is 1/n
 times as fast as in air, then we must have
EC=n⋅XF.(26.3)
Therefore we see that when we have the right point, XCsinEXC=n⋅XCsinXCF
 or, cancelling the common hypotenuse length XC
 and noting that
EXC=ECN=θi and XCF≈BCN′=θr(when X is near C),
we have
sinθi=nsinθr.(26.4)
So we see that to get from one point to another in the least time when the ratio of speeds is n
, the light should enter at such an angle that the ratio of the sines of the angles θi
 and θr
 is the ratio of the speeds in the two media.

26–4Applications of Fermat’s principle
Now let us consider some of the interesting consequences of the principle of least time. First is the principle of reciprocity. If to go from A
 to B
 we have found the path of the least time, then to go in the opposite direction (assuming that light goes at the same speed in any direction), the shortest time will be the same path, and therefore, if light can be sent one way, it can be sent the other way.


Fig. 26–6.A beam of light is offset as it passes through a transparent block.
An example of interest is a glass block with plane parallel faces, set at an angle to a light beam. Light, in going through the block from a point A
 to a point B
 (Fig. 26–6) does not go through in a straight line, but instead it decreases the time in the block by making the angle in the block less inclined, although it loses a little bit in the air. The beam is simply displaced parallel to itself because the angles in and out are the same.


Fig. 26–7.Near the horizon, the apparent sun is higher than the true sun by about 1/2
 degree.
A third interesting phenomenon is the fact that when we see the sun setting, it is already below the horizon! It does not look as though it is below the horizon, but it is (Fig. 26–7). The earth’s atmosphere is thin at the top and dense at the bottom. Light travels more slowly in air than it does in a vacuum, and so the light of the sun can get to point S
 beyond the horizon more quickly if, instead of just going in a straight line, it avoids the dense regions where it goes slowly by getting through them at a steeper tilt. When it appears to go below the horizon, it is actually already well below the horizon. Another example of this phenomenon is the mirage that one often sees while driving on hot roads. One sees “water” on the road, but when he gets there, it is as dry as the desert! The phenomenon is the following. What we are really seeing is the sky light “reflected” on the road: light from the sky, heading for the road, can end up in the eye, as shown in Fig. 26–8. Why? The air is very hot just above the road but it is cooler up higher. Hotter air is more expanded than cooler air and is thinner, and this decreases the speed of light less. That is to say, light goes faster in the hot region than in the cool region. Therefore, instead of the light deciding to come in the straightforward way, it also has a least-time path by which it goes into the region where it goes faster for awhile, in order to save time. So, it can go in a curve.


Fig. 26–8.A mirage.
As another important example of the principle of least time, suppose that we would like to arrange a situation where we have all the light that comes out of one point, P
, collected back together at another point, P′
 (Fig. 26–9). That means, of course, that the light can go in a straight line from P
 to P′
. That is all right. But how can we arrange that not only does it go straight, but also so that the light starting out from P
 toward Q
 also ends up at P′
? We want to bring all the light back to what we call a focus. How? If the light always takes the path of least time, then certainly it should not want to go over all these other paths. The only way that the light can be perfectly satisfied to take several adjacent paths is to make those times exactly equal! Otherwise, it would select the one of least time. Therefore the problem of making a focusing system is merely to arrange a device so that it takes the same time for the light to go on all the different paths!


Fig. 26–9.An optical “black box.”
This is easy to do. Suppose that we had a piece of glass in which light goes slower than it does in the air (Fig. 26–10). Now consider a ray which goes in air in the path PQP′
. That is a longer path than from P
 directly to P′
 and no doubt takes a longer time. But if we were to insert a piece of glass of just the right thickness (we shall later figure out how thick) it might exactly compensate the excess time that it would take the light to go at an angle! In those circumstances we can arrange that the time the light takes to go straight through is the same as the time it takes to go in the path PQP′
. Likewise, if we take a ray PRR′P′
 which is partly inclined, it is not quite as long as PQP′
, and we do not have to compensate as much as for the straight one, but we do have to compensate somewhat. We end up with a piece of glass that looks like Fig. 26–10. With this shape, all the light which comes from P
 will go to P′
. This, of course, is well known to us, and we call such a device a converging lens. In the next chapter we shall actually calculate what shape the lens has to have to make a perfect focus.


Fig. 26–10.A focusing optical system.
Take another example: suppose we wish to arrange some mirrors so that the light from P
 always goes to P′
 (Fig. 26–11). On any path, it goes to some mirror and comes back, and all times must be equal. Here the light always travels in air, so the time and the distance are proportional. Therefore the statement that all the times are the same is the same as the statement that the total distance is the same. Thus the sum of the two distances r1
 and r2
 must be a constant. An ellipse is that curve which has the property that the sum of the distances from two points is a constant for every point on the ellipse; thus we can be sure that the light from one focus will come to the other.


Fig. 26–11.An ellipsoidal mirror.
The same principle works for gathering the light of a star. The great 200
-inch Palomar telescope is built on the following principle. Imagine a star billions of miles away; we would like to cause all the light that comes in to come to a focus. Of course we cannot draw the rays that go all the way up to the star, but we still want to check whether the times are equal. Of course we know that when the various rays have arrived at some plane KK′
, perpendicular to the rays, all the times in this plane are equal (Fig. 26–12). The rays must then come down to the mirror and proceed toward P′
 in equal times. That is, we must find a curve which has the property that the sum of the distances XX′+X′P′
 is a constant, no matter where X
 is chosen. An easy way to find it is to extend the length of the line XX′
 down to a plane LL′
. Now if we arrange our curve so that A′A′′=A′P′
, B′B′′=B′P′
, C′C′′=C′P′
, and so on, we will have our curve, because then of course, AA′+A′P′=AA′+A′A′′
 will be constant. Thus our curve is the locus of all points equidistant from a line and a point. Such a curve is called a parabola; the mirror is made in the shape of a parabola.


Fig. 26–12.A paraboloidal mirror.
The above examples illustrate the principle upon which such optical devices can be designed. The exact curves can be calculated using the principle that, to focus perfectly, the travel times must be exactly equal for all light rays, as well as being less than for any other nearby path.

We shall discuss these focusing optical devices further in the next chapter; let us now discuss the further development of the theory. When a new theoretical principle is developed, such as the principle of least time, our first inclination might be to say, “Well, that is very pretty; it is delightful; but the question is, does it help at all in understanding the physics?” Someone may say, “Yes, look at how many things we can now understand!” Another says, “Very well, but I can understand mirrors, too. I need a curve such that every tangent plane makes equal angles with the two rays. I can figure out a lens, too, because every ray that comes to it is bent through an angle given by Snell’s law.” Evidently the statement of least time and the statement that angles are equal on reflection, and that the sines of the angles are proportional on refraction, are the same. So is it merely a philosophical question, or one of beauty? There can be arguments on both sides.

However, the importance of a powerful principle is that it predicts new things.

It is easy to show that there are a number of new things predicted by Fermat’s principle. First, suppose that there are three media, glass, water, and air, and we perform a refraction experiment and measure the index n
 for one medium against another. Let us call n12
 the index of air (1
) against water (2
); n13
 the index of air (1
) against glass (3
). If we measured water against glass, we should find another index, which we shall call n23
. But there is no a priori reason why there should be any connection between n12
, n13
, and n23
. On the other hand, according to the idea of least time, there is a definite relationship. The index n12
 is the ratio of two things, the speed in air to the speed in water; n13
 is the ratio of the speed in air to the speed in glass; n23
 is the ratio of the speed in water to the speed in glass. Therefore we cancel out the air, and get
n23=v2v3=v1/v3v1/v2=n13n12.(26.5)
In other words, we predict that the index for a new pair of materials can be obtained from the indexes of the individual materials, both against air or against vacuum. So if we measure the speed of light in all materials, and from this get a single number for each material, namely its index relative to vacuum, called ni
 (n1
 is the speed in vacuum relative to the speed in air, etc.), then our formula is easy. The index for any two materials i
 and j
 is
nij=vivj=njni.(26.6)
Using only Snell’s law, there is no basis for a prediction of this kind.1 But of course this prediction works. The relation (26.5) was known very early, and was a very strong argument for the principle of least time.

Another argument for the principle of least time, another prediction, is that if we measure the speed of light in water, it will be lower than in air. This is a prediction of a completely different type. It is a brilliant prediction, because all we have so far measured are angles; here we have a theoretical prediction which is quite different from the observations from which Fermat deduced the idea of least time. It turns out, in fact, that the speed in water is slower than the speed in air, by just the proportion that is needed to get the right index!

26–5A more precise statement of Fermat’s principle
Actually, we must make the statement of the principle of least time a little more accurately. It was not stated correctly above. It is incorrectly called the principle of least time and we have gone along with the incorrect description for convenience, but we must now see what the correct statement is. Suppose we had a mirror as in Fig. 26–3. What makes the light think it has to go to the mirror? The path of least time is clearly AB
. So some people might say, “Sometimes it is a maximum time.” It is not a maximum time, because certainly a curved path would take a still longer time! The correct statement is the following: a ray going in a certain particular path has the property that if we make a small change (say a one percent shift) in the ray in any manner whatever, say in the location at which it comes to the mirror, or the shape of the curve, or anything, there will be no first-order change in the time; there will be only a second-order change in the time. In other words, the principle is that light takes a path such that there are many other paths nearby which take almost exactly the same time.

The following is another difficulty with the principle of least time, and one which people who do not like this kind of a theory could never stomach. With Snell’s theory we can “understand” light. Light goes along, it sees a surface, it bends because it does something at the surface. The idea of causality, that it goes from one point to another, and another, and so on, is easy to understand. But the principle of least time is a completely different philosophical principle about the way nature works. Instead of saying it is a causal thing, that when we do one thing, something else happens, and so on, it says this: we set up the situation, and light decides which is the shortest time, or the extreme one, and chooses that path. But what does it do, how does it find out? Does it smell the nearby paths, and check them against each other? The answer is, yes, it does, in a way. That is the feature which is, of course, not known in geometrical optics, and which is involved in the idea of wavelength; the wavelength tells us approximately how far away the light must “smell” the path in order to check it. It is hard to demonstrate this fact on a large scale with light, because the wavelengths are so terribly short. But with radiowaves, say 3
-cm waves, the distances over which the radiowaves are checking are larger. If we have a source of radiowaves, a detector, and a slit, as in Fig. 26–13, the rays of course go from S
 to D
 because it is a straight line, and if we close down the slit it is all right—they still go. But now if we move the detector aside to D′
, the waves will not go through the wide slit from S
 to D′
, because they check several paths nearby, and say, “No, my friend, those all correspond to different times.” On the other hand, if we prevent the radiation from checking the paths by closing the slit down to a very narrow crack, then there is but one path available, and the radiation takes it! With a narrow slit, more radiation reaches D′
 than reaches it with a wide slit!


Fig. 26–13.The passage of radiowaves through a narrow slit.
One can do the same thing with light, but it is hard to demonstrate on a large scale. The effect can be seen under the following simple conditions. Find a small, bright light, say an unfrosted bulb in a street light far away or the reflection of the sun in a curved automobile bumper. Then put two fingers in front of one eye, so as to look through the crack, and squeeze the light to zero very gently. You will see that the image of the light, which was a little dot before, becomes quite elongated, and even stretches into a long line. The reason is that the fingers are very close together, and the light which is supposed to come in a straight line is spread out at an angle, so that when it comes into the eye it comes in from several directions. Also you will notice, if you are very careful, side maxima, a lot of fringes along the edges too. Furthermore, the whole thing is colored. All of this will be explained in due time, but for the present it is a demonstration that light does not always go in straight lines, and it is one that is very easily performed.

26–6How it works
Finally, we give a very crude view of what actually happens, how the whole thing really works, from what we now believe is the correct, quantum-dynamically accurate viewpoint, but of course only qualitatively described. In following the light from A
 to B
 in Fig. 26–3, we find that the light does not seem to be in the form of waves at all. Instead the rays seem to be made up of photons, and they actually produce clicks in a photon counter, if we are using one. The brightness of the light is proportional to the average number of photons that come in per second, and what we calculate is the chance that a photon gets from A
 to B
, say by hitting the mirror. The law for that chance is the following very strange one. Take any path and find the time for that path; then make a complex number, or draw a little complex vector, ρeiθ
, whose angle θ
 is proportional to the time. The number of turns per second is the frequency of the light. Now take another path; it has, for instance, a different time, so the vector for it is turned through a different angle—the angle being always proportional to the time. Take all the available paths and add on a little vector for each one; then the answer is that the chance of arrival of the photon is proportional to the square of the length of the final vector, from the beginning to the end!


Fig. 26–14.The summation of probability amplitudes for many neighboring paths.
Now let us show how this implies the principle of least time for a mirror. We consider all rays, all possible paths ADB
, AEB
, ACB
, etc., in Fig. 26–3. The path ADB
 makes a certain small contribution, but the next path, AEB
, takes a quite different time, so its angle θ
 is quite different. Let us say that point C
 corresponds to minimum time, where if we change the paths the times do not change. So for awhile the times do change, and then they begin to change less and less as we get near point C
 (Fig. 26–14). So the arrows which we have to add are coming almost exactly at the same angle for awhile near C
, and then gradually the time begins to increase again, and the phases go around the other way, and so on. Eventually, we have quite a tight knot. The total probability is the distance from one end to the other, squared. Almost all of that accumulated probability occurs in the region where all the arrows are in the same direction (or in the same phase). All the contributions from the paths which have very different times as we change the path, cancel themselves out by pointing in different directions. That is why, if we hide the extreme parts of the mirror, it still reflects almost exactly the same, because all we did was to take out a piece of the diagram inside the spiral ends, and that makes only a very small change in the light. So this is the relationship between the ultimate picture of photons with a probability of arrival depending on an accumulation of arrows, and the principle of least time.



====================================  VOLUME 3   ===========================================



===  CHAPTER 1 : QUANTUM BEHAVIOR  ===



1–1Atomic mechanics
“Quantum mechanics” is the description of the behavior of matter and light in all its details and, in particular, of the happenings on an atomic scale. Things on a very small scale behave like nothing that you have any direct experience about. They do not behave like waves, they do not behave like particles, they do not behave like clouds, or billiard balls, or weights on springs, or like anything that you have ever seen.

Newton thought that light was made up of particles, but then it was discovered that it behaves like a wave. Later, however (in the beginning of the twentieth century), it was found that light did indeed sometimes behave like a particle. Historically, the electron, for example, was thought to behave like a particle, and then it was found that in many respects it behaved like a wave. So it really behaves like neither. Now we have given up. We say: “It is like neither.”

There is one lucky break, however—electrons behave just like light. The quantum behavior of atomic objects (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, and so on) is the same for all, they are all “particle waves,” or whatever you want to call them. So what we learn about the properties of electrons (which we shall use for our examples) will apply also to all “particles,” including photons of light.

The gradual accumulation of information about atomic and small-scale behavior during the first quarter of the 20th century, which gave some indications about how small things do behave, produced an increasing confusion which was finally resolved in 1926 and 1927 by Schrödinger, Heisenberg, and Born. They finally obtained a consistent description of the behavior of matter on a small scale. We take up the main features of that description in this chapter.

Because atomic behavior is so unlike ordinary experience, it is very difficult to get used to, and it appears peculiar and mysterious to everyone—both to the novice and to the experienced physicist. Even the experts do not understand it the way they would like to, and it is perfectly reasonable that they should not, because all of direct, human experience and of human intuition applies to large objects. We know how large objects will act, but things on a small scale just do not act that way. So we have to learn about them in a sort of abstract or imaginative fashion and not by connection with our direct experience.

In this chapter we shall tackle immediately the basic element of the mysterious behavior in its most strange form. We choose to examine a phenomenon which is impossible, absolutely impossible, to explain in any classical way, and which has in it the heart of quantum mechanics. In reality, it contains the only mystery. We cannot make the mystery go away by “explaining” how it works. We will just tell you how it works. In telling you how it works we will have told you about the basic peculiarities of all quantum mechanics.

1–2An experiment with bullets

Fig. 1–1.Interference experiment with bullets.
To try to understand the quantum behavior of electrons, we shall compare and contrast their behavior, in a particular experimental setup, with the more familiar behavior of particles like bullets, and with the behavior of waves like water waves. We consider first the behavior of bullets in the experimental setup shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1–1. We have a machine gun that shoots a stream of bullets. It is not a very good gun, in that it sprays the bullets (randomly) over a fairly large angular spread, as indicated in the figure. In front of the gun we have a wall (made of armor plate) that has in it two holes just about big enough to let a bullet through. Beyond the wall is a backstop (say a thick wall of wood) which will “absorb” the bullets when they hit it. In front of the backstop we have an object which we shall call a “detector” of bullets. It might be a box containing sand. Any bullet that enters the detector will be stopped and accumulated. When we wish, we can empty the box and count the number of bullets that have been caught. The detector can be moved back and forth (in what we will call the x
-direction). With this apparatus, we can find out experimentally the answer to the question: “What is the probability that a bullet which passes through the holes in the wall will arrive at the backstop at the distance x
 from the center?” First, you should realize that we should talk about probability, because we cannot say definitely where any particular bullet will go. A bullet which happens to hit one of the holes may bounce off the edges of the hole, and may end up anywhere at all. By “probability” we mean the chance that the bullet will arrive at the detector, which we can measure by counting the number which arrive at the detector in a certain time and then taking the ratio of this number to the total number that hit the backstop during that time. Or, if we assume that the gun always shoots at the same rate during the measurements, the probability we want is just proportional to the number that reach the detector in some standard time interval.

For our present purposes we would like to imagine a somewhat idealized experiment in which the bullets are not real bullets, but are indestructible bullets—they cannot break in half. In our experiment we find that bullets always arrive in lumps, and when we find something in the detector, it is always one whole bullet. If the rate at which the machine gun fires is made very low, we find that at any given moment either nothing arrives, or one and only one—exactly one—bullet arrives at the backstop. Also, the size of the lump certainly does not depend on the rate of firing of the gun. We shall say: “Bullets always arrive in identical lumps.” What we measure with our detector is the probability of arrival of a lump. And we measure the probability as a function of x
. The result of such measurements with this apparatus (we have not yet done the experiment, so we are really imagining the result) are plotted in the graph drawn in part (c) of Fig. 1–1. In the graph we plot the probability to the right and x
 vertically, so that the x
-scale fits the diagram of the apparatus. We call the probability P12
 because the bullets may have come either through hole 1
 or through hole 2
. You will not be surprised that P12
 is large near the middle of the graph but gets small if x
 is very large. You may wonder, however, why P12
 has its maximum value at x=0
. We can understand this fact if we do our experiment again after covering up hole 2
, and once more while covering up hole 1
. When hole 2
 is covered, bullets can pass only through hole 1
, and we get the curve marked P1
 in part (b) of the figure. As you would expect, the maximum of P1
 occurs at the value of x
 which is on a straight line with the gun and hole 1
. When hole 1
 is closed, we get the symmetric curve P2
 drawn in the figure. P2
 is the probability distribution for bullets that pass through hole 2
. Comparing parts (b) and (c) of Fig. 1–1, we find the important result that
P12=P1+P2.(1.1)
The probabilities just add together. The effect with both holes open is the sum of the effects with each hole open alone. We shall call this result an observation of “no interference,” for a reason that you will see later. So much for bullets. They come in lumps, and their probability of arrival shows no interference.

1–3An experiment with waves

Fig. 1–2.Interference experiment with water waves.
Now we wish to consider an experiment with water waves. The apparatus is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1–2. We have a shallow trough of water. A small object labeled the “wave source” is jiggled up and down by a motor and makes circular waves. To the right of the source we have again a wall with two holes, and beyond that is a second wall, which, to keep things simple, is an “absorber,” so that there is no reflection of the waves that arrive there. This can be done by building a gradual sand “beach.” In front of the beach we place a detector which can be moved back and forth in the x
-direction, as before. The detector is now a device which measures the “intensity” of the wave motion. You can imagine a gadget which measures the height of the wave motion, but whose scale is calibrated in proportion to the square of the actual height, so that the reading is proportional to the intensity of the wave. Our detector reads, then, in proportion to the energy being carried by the wave—or rather, the rate at which energy is carried to the detector.

With our wave apparatus, the first thing to notice is that the intensity can have any size. If the source just moves a very small amount, then there is just a little bit of wave motion at the detector. When there is more motion at the source, there is more intensity at the detector. The intensity of the wave can have any value at all. We would not say that there was any “lumpiness” in the wave intensity.

Now let us measure the wave intensity for various values of x
 (keeping the wave source operating always in the same way). We get the interesting-looking curve marked I12
 in part (c) of the figure.

We have already worked out how such patterns can come about when we studied the interference of electric waves in Volume I. In this case we would observe that the original wave is diffracted at the holes, and new circular waves spread out from each hole. If we cover one hole at a time and measure the intensity distribution at the absorber we find the rather simple intensity curves shown in part (b) of the figure. I1
 is the intensity of the wave from hole 1
 (which we find by measuring when hole 2
 is blocked off) and I2
 is the intensity of the wave from hole 2
 (seen when hole 1
 is blocked).

The intensity I12
 observed when both holes are open is certainly not the sum of I1
 and I2
. We say that there is “interference” of the two waves. At some places (where the curve I12
 has its maxima) the waves are “in phase” and the wave peaks add together to give a large amplitude and, therefore, a large intensity. We say that the two waves are “interfering constructively” at such places. There will be such constructive interference wherever the distance from the detector to one hole is a whole number of wavelengths larger (or shorter) than the distance from the detector to the other hole.

At those places where the two waves arrive at the detector with a phase difference of π
 (where they are “out of phase”) the resulting wave motion at the detector will be the difference of the two amplitudes. The waves “interfere destructively,” and we get a low value for the wave intensity. We expect such low values wherever the distance between hole 1
 and the detector is different from the distance between hole 2
 and the detector by an odd number of half-wavelengths. The low values of I12
 in Fig. 1–2 correspond to the places where the two waves interfere destructively.

You will remember that the quantitative relationship between I1
, I2
, and I12
 can be expressed in the following way: The instantaneous height of the water wave at the detector for the wave from hole 1
 can be written as (the real part of) h1eiωt
, where the “amplitude” h1
 is, in general, a complex number. The intensity is proportional to the mean squared height or, when we use the complex numbers, to the absolute value squared |h1|2
. Similarly, for hole 2
 the height is h2eiωt
 and the intensity is proportional to |h2|2
. When both holes are open, the wave heights add to give the height (h1+h2)eiωt
 and the intensity |h1+h2|2
. Omitting the constant of proportionality for our present purposes, the proper relations for interfering waves are
I1=|h1|2,I2=|h2|2,I12=|h1+h2|2.(1.2)

You will notice that the result is quite different from that obtained with bullets (Eq. 1.1). If we expand |h1+h2|2
 we see that
|h1+h2|2=|h1|2+|h2|2+2|h1||h2|cosδ,(1.3)
where δ
 is the phase difference between h1
 and h2
. In terms of the intensities, we could write
I12=I1+I2+2I1I2−−−−√cosδ.(1.4)
The last term in (1.4) is the “interference term.” So much for water waves. The intensity can have any value, and it shows interference.

1–4An experiment with electrons

Fig. 1–3.Interference experiment with electrons.
Now we imagine a similar experiment with electrons. It is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1–3. We make an electron gun which consists of a tungsten wire heated by an electric current and surrounded by a metal box with a hole in it. If the wire is at a negative voltage with respect to the box, electrons emitted by the wire will be accelerated toward the walls and some will pass through the hole. All the electrons which come out of the gun will have (nearly) the same energy. In front of the gun is again a wall (just a thin metal plate) with two holes in it. Beyond the wall is another plate which will serve as a “backstop.” In front of the backstop we place a movable detector. The detector might be a geiger counter or, perhaps better, an electron multiplier, which is connected to a loudspeaker.

We should say right away that you should not try to set up this experiment (as you could have done with the two we have already described). This experiment has never been done in just this way. The trouble is that the apparatus would have to be made on an impossibly small scale to show the effects we are interested in. We are doing a “thought experiment,” which we have chosen because it is easy to think about. We know the results that would be obtained because there are many experiments that have been done, in which the scale and the proportions have been chosen to show the effects we shall describe.

The first thing we notice with our electron experiment is that we hear sharp “clicks” from the detector (that is, from the loudspeaker). And all “clicks” are the same. There are no “half-clicks.”

We would also notice that the “clicks” come very erratically. Something like: click ….. click-click … click …….. click …. click-click …… click …, etc., just as you have, no doubt, heard a geiger counter operating. If we count the clicks which arrive in a sufficiently long time—say for many minutes—and then count again for another equal period, we find that the two numbers are very nearly the same. So we can speak of the average rate at which the clicks are heard (so-and-so-many clicks per minute on the average).

As we move the detector around, the rate at which the clicks appear is faster or slower, but the size (loudness) of each click is always the same. If we lower the temperature of the wire in the gun, the rate of clicking slows down, but still each click sounds the same. We would notice also that if we put two separate detectors at the backstop, one or the other would click, but never both at once. (Except that once in a while, if there were two clicks very close together in time, our ear might not sense the separation.) We conclude, therefore, that whatever arrives at the backstop arrives in “lumps.” All the “lumps” are the same size: only whole “lumps” arrive, and they arrive one at a time at the backstop. We shall say: “Electrons always arrive in identical lumps.”

Just as for our experiment with bullets, we can now proceed to find experimentally the answer to the question: “What is the relative probability that an electron ‘lump’ will arrive at the backstop at various distances x
 from the center?” As before, we obtain the relative probability by observing the rate of clicks, holding the operation of the gun constant. The probability that lumps will arrive at a particular x
 is proportional to the average rate of clicks at that x
.

The result of our experiment is the interesting curve marked P12
 in part (c) of Fig. 1–3. Yes! That is the way electrons go.

1–5The interference of electron waves
Now let us try to analyze the curve of Fig. 1–3 to see whether we can understand the behavior of the electrons. The first thing we would say is that since they come in lumps, each lump, which we may as well call an electron, has come either through hole 1
 or through hole 2
. Let us write this in the form of a “Proposition”:

Proposition A: Each electron either goes through hole 1
 or it goes through hole 2
.

Assuming Proposition A, all electrons that arrive at the backstop can be divided into two classes: (1) those that come through hole 1
, and (2) those that come through hole 2
. So our observed curve must be the sum of the effects of the electrons which come through hole 1
 and the electrons which come through hole 2
. Let us check this idea by experiment. First, we will make a measurement for those electrons that come through hole 1
. We block off hole 2
 and make our counts of the clicks from the detector. From the clicking rate, we get P1
. The result of the measurement is shown by the curve marked P1
 in part (b) of Fig. 1–3. The result seems quite reasonable. In a similar way, we measure P2
, the probability distribution for the electrons that come through hole 2
. The result of this measurement is also drawn in the figure.

The result P12
 obtained with both holes open is clearly not the sum of P1
 and P2
, the probabilities for each hole alone. In analogy with our water-wave experiment, we say: “There is interference.”
For electrons:P12≠P1+P2.(1.5)

How can such an interference come about? Perhaps we should say: “Well, that means, presumably, that it is not true that the lumps go either through hole 1
 or hole 2
, because if they did, the probabilities should add. Perhaps they go in a more complicated way. They split in half and …” But no! They cannot, they always arrive in lumps … “Well, perhaps some of them go through 1
, and then they go around through 2
, and then around a few more times, or by some other complicated path … then by closing hole 2
, we changed the chance that an electron that started out through hole 1
 would finally get to the backstop …” But notice! There are some points at which very few electrons arrive when both holes are open, but which receive many electrons if we close one hole, so closing one hole increased the number from the other. Notice, however, that at the center of the pattern, P12
 is more than twice as large as P1+P2
. It is as though closing one hole decreased the number of electrons which come through the other hole. It seems hard to explain both effects by proposing that the electrons travel in complicated paths.

It is all quite mysterious. And the more you look at it the more mysterious it seems. Many ideas have been concocted to try to explain the curve for P12
 in terms of individual electrons going around in complicated ways through the holes. None of them has succeeded. None of them can get the right curve for P12
 in terms of P1
 and P2
.

Yet, surprisingly enough, the mathematics for relating P1
 and P2
 to P12
 is extremely simple. For P12
 is just like the curve I12
 of Fig. 1–2, and that was simple. What is going on at the backstop can be described by two complex numbers that we can call ϕ1
 and ϕ2
 (they are functions of x
, of course). The absolute square of ϕ1
 gives the effect with only hole 1
 open. That is, P1=|ϕ1|2
. The effect with only hole 2
 open is given by ϕ2
 in the same way. That is, P2=|ϕ2|2
. And the combined effect of the two holes is just P12=|ϕ1+ϕ2|2
. The mathematics is the same as that we had for the water waves! (It is hard to see how one could get such a simple result from a complicated game of electrons going back and forth through the plate on some strange trajectory.)

We conclude the following: The electrons arrive in lumps, like particles, and the probability of arrival of these lumps is distributed like the distribution of intensity of a wave. It is in this sense that an electron behaves “sometimes like a particle and sometimes like a wave.”

Incidentally, when we were dealing with classical waves we defined the intensity as the mean over time of the square of the wave amplitude, and we used complex numbers as a mathematical trick to simplify the analysis. But in quantum mechanics it turns out that the amplitudes must be represented by complex numbers. The real parts alone will not do. That is a technical point, for the moment, because the formulas look just the same.

Since the probability of arrival through both holes is given so simply, although it is not equal to (P1+P2)
, that is really all there is to say. But there are a large number of subtleties involved in the fact that nature does work this way. We would like to illustrate some of these subtleties for you now. First, since the number that arrives at a particular point is not equal to the number that arrives through 1
 plus the number that arrives through 2
, as we would have concluded from Proposition A, undoubtedly we should conclude that Proposition A is false. It is not true that the electrons go either through hole 1
 or hole 2
. But that conclusion can be tested by another experiment.

1–6Watching the electrons

Fig. 1–4.A different electron experiment.
We shall now try the following experiment. To our electron apparatus we add a very strong light source, placed behind the wall and between the two holes, as shown in Fig. 1–4. We know that electric charges scatter light. So when an electron passes, however it does pass, on its way to the detector, it will scatter some light to our eye, and we can see where the electron goes. If, for instance, an electron were to take the path via hole 2
 that is sketched in Fig. 1–4, we should see a flash of light coming from the vicinity of the place marked A
 in the figure. If an electron passes through hole 1
, we would expect to see a flash from the vicinity of the upper hole. If it should happen that we get light from both places at the same time, because the electron divides in half … Let us just do the experiment!

Here is what we see: every time that we hear a “click” from our electron detector (at the backstop), we also see a flash of light either near hole 1
 or near hole 2
, but never both at once! And we observe the same result no matter where we put the detector. From this observation we conclude that when we look at the electrons we find that the electrons go either through one hole or the other. Experimentally, Proposition A is necessarily true.

What, then, is wrong with our argument against Proposition A? Why isn’t P12
 just equal to P1+P2
? Back to experiment! Let us keep track of the electrons and find out what they are doing. For each position (x
-location) of the detector we will count the electrons that arrive and also keep track of which hole they went through, by watching for the flashes. We can keep track of things this way: whenever we hear a “click” we will put a count in Column 1
 if we see the flash near hole 1
, and if we see the flash near hole 2
, we will record a count in Column 2
. Every electron which arrives is recorded in one of two classes: those which come through 1
 and those which come through 2
. From the number recorded in Column 1
 we get the probability P′1
 that an electron will arrive at the detector via hole 1
; and from the number recorded in Column 2
 we get P′2
, the probability that an electron will arrive at the detector via hole 2
. If we now repeat such a measurement for many values of x
, we get the curves for P′1
 and P′2
 shown in part (b) of Fig. 1–4.

Well, that is not too surprising! We get for P′1
 something quite similar to what we got before for P1
 by blocking off hole 2
; and P′2
 is similar to what we got by blocking hole 1
. So there is not any complicated business like going through both holes. When we watch them, the electrons come through just as we would expect them to come through. Whether the holes are closed or open, those which we see come through hole 1
 are distributed in the same way whether hole 2
 is open or closed.

But wait! What do we have now for the total probability, the probability that an electron will arrive at the detector by any route? We already have that information. We just pretend that we never looked at the light flashes, and we lump together the detector clicks which we have separated into the two columns. We must just add the numbers. For the probability that an electron will arrive at the backstop by passing through either hole, we do find P′12=P′1+P′2
. That is, although we succeeded in watching which hole our electrons come through, we no longer get the old interference curve P12
, but a new one, P′12
, showing no interference! If we turn out the light P12
 is restored.

We must conclude that when we look at the electrons the distribution of them on the screen is different than when we do not look. Perhaps it is turning on our light source that disturbs things? It must be that the electrons are very delicate, and the light, when it scatters off the electrons, gives them a jolt that changes their motion. We know that the electric field of the light acting on a charge will exert a force on it. So perhaps we should expect the motion to be changed. Anyway, the light exerts a big influence on the electrons. By trying to “watch” the electrons we have changed their motions. That is, the jolt given to the electron when the photon is scattered by it is such as to change the electron’s motion enough so that if it might have gone to where P12
 was at a maximum it will instead land where P12
 was a minimum; that is why we no longer see the wavy interference effects.

You may be thinking: “Don’t use such a bright source! Turn the brightness down! The light waves will then be weaker and will not disturb the electrons so much. Surely, by making the light dimmer and dimmer, eventually the wave will be weak enough that it will have a negligible effect.” O.K. Let’s try it. The first thing we observe is that the flashes of light scattered from the electrons as they pass by does not get weaker. It is always the same-sized flash. The only thing that happens as the light is made dimmer is that sometimes we hear a “click” from the detector but see no flash at all. The electron has gone by without being “seen.” What we are observing is that light also acts like electrons, we knew that it was “wavy,” but now we find that it is also “lumpy.” It always arrives—or is scattered—in lumps that we call “photons.” As we turn down the intensity of the light source we do not change the size of the photons, only the rate at which they are emitted. That explains why, when our source is dim, some electrons get by without being seen. There did not happen to be a photon around at the time the electron went through.

This is all a little discouraging. If it is true that whenever we “see” the electron we see the same-sized flash, then those electrons we see are always the disturbed ones. Let us try the experiment with a dim light anyway. Now whenever we hear a click in the detector we will keep a count in three columns: in Column (1) those electrons seen by hole 1
, in Column (2) those electrons seen by hole 2
, and in Column (3) those electrons not seen at all. When we work up our data (computing the probabilities) we find these results: Those “seen by hole 1
” have a distribution like P′1
; those “seen by hole 2
” have a distribution like P′2
 (so that those “seen by either hole 1
 or 2
” have a distribution like P′12
); and those “not seen at all” have a “wavy” distribution just like P12
 of Fig. 1–3! If the electrons are not seen, we have interference!

That is understandable. When we do not see the electron, no photon disturbs it, and when we do see it, a photon has disturbed it. There is always the same amount of disturbance because the light photons all produce the same-sized effects and the effect of the photons being scattered is enough to smear out any interference effect.

Is there not some way we can see the electrons without disturbing them? We learned in an earlier chapter that the momentum carried by a “photon” is inversely proportional to its wavelength (p=h/λ
). Certainly the jolt given to the electron when the photon is scattered toward our eye depends on the momentum that photon carries. Aha! If we want to disturb the electrons only slightly we should not have lowered the intensity of the light, we should have lowered its frequency (the same as increasing its wavelength). Let us use light of a redder color. We could even use infrared light, or radiowaves (like radar), and “see” where the electron went with the help of some equipment that can “see” light of these longer wavelengths. If we use “gentler” light perhaps we can avoid disturbing the electrons so much.

Let us try the experiment with longer waves. We shall keep repeating our experiment, each time with light of a longer wavelength. At first, nothing seems to change. The results are the same. Then a terrible thing happens. You remember that when we discussed the microscope we pointed out that, due to the wave nature of the light, there is a limitation on how close two spots can be and still be seen as two separate spots. This distance is of the order of the wavelength of light. So now, when we make the wavelength longer than the distance between our holes, we see a big fuzzy flash when the light is scattered by the electrons. We can no longer tell which hole the electron went through! We just know it went somewhere! And it is just with light of this color that we find that the jolts given to the electron are small enough so that P′12
 begins to look like P12
—that we begin to get some interference effect. And it is only for wavelengths much longer than the separation of the two holes (when we have no chance at all of telling where the electron went) that the disturbance due to the light gets sufficiently small that we again get the curve P12
 shown in Fig. 1–3.

In our experiment we find that it is impossible to arrange the light in such a way that one can tell which hole the electron went through, and at the same time not disturb the pattern. It was suggested by Heisenberg that the then new laws of nature could only be consistent if there were some basic limitation on our experimental capabilities not previously recognized. He proposed, as a general principle, his uncertainty principle, which we can state in terms of our experiment as follows: “It is impossible to design an apparatus to determine which hole the electron passes through, that will not at the same time disturb the electrons enough to destroy the interference pattern.” If an apparatus is capable of determining which hole the electron goes through, it cannot be so delicate that it does not disturb the pattern in an essential way. No one has ever found (or even thought of) a way around the uncertainty principle. So we must assume that it describes a basic characteristic of nature.

The complete theory of quantum mechanics which we now use to describe atoms and, in fact, all matter, depends on the correctness of the uncertainty principle. Since quantum mechanics is such a successful theory, our belief in the uncertainty principle is reinforced. But if a way to “beat” the uncertainty principle were ever discovered, quantum mechanics would give inconsistent results and would have to be discarded as a valid theory of nature.

“Well,” you say, “what about Proposition A? Is it true, or is it not true, that the electron either goes through hole 1
 or it goes through hole 2
?” The only answer that can be given is that we have found from experiment that there is a certain special way that we have to think in order that we do not get into inconsistencies. What we must say (to avoid making wrong predictions) is the following. If one looks at the holes or, more accurately, if one has a piece of apparatus which is capable of determining whether the electrons go through hole 1
 or hole 2
, then one can say that it goes either through hole 1
 or hole 2
. But, when one does not try to tell which way the electron goes, when there is nothing in the experiment to disturb the electrons, then one may not say that an electron goes either through hole 1
 or hole 2
. If one does say that, and starts to make any deductions from the statement, he will make errors in the analysis. This is the logical tightrope on which we must walk if we wish to describe nature successfully.

If the motion of all matter—as well as electrons—must be described in terms of waves, what about the bullets in our first experiment? Why didn’t we see an interference pattern there? It turns out that for the bullets the wavelengths were so tiny that the interference patterns became very fine. So fine, in fact, that with any detector of finite size one could not distinguish the separate maxima and minima. What we saw was only a kind of average, which is the classical curve. In Fig. 1–5 we have tried to indicate schematically what happens with large-scale objects. Part (a) of the figure shows the probability distribution one might predict for bullets, using quantum mechanics. The rapid wiggles are supposed to represent the interference pattern one gets for waves of very short wavelength. Any physical detector, however, straddles several wiggles of the probability curve, so that the measurements show the smooth curve drawn in part (b) of the figure.


Fig. 1–5.Interference pattern with bullets: (a) actual (schematic), (b) observed.
1–7First principles of quantum mechanics
We will now write a summary of the main conclusions of our experiments. We will, however, put the results in a form which makes them true for a general class of such experiments. We can write our summary more simply if we first define an “ideal experiment” as one in which there are no uncertain external influences, i.e., no jiggling or other things going on that we cannot take into account. We would be quite precise if we said: “An ideal experiment is one in which all of the initial and final conditions of the experiment are completely specified.” What we will call “an event” is, in general, just a specific set of initial and final conditions. (For example: “an electron leaves the gun, arrives at the detector, and nothing else happens.”) Now for our summary.

Summary

The probability of an event in an ideal experiment is given by the square of the absolute value of a complex number ϕ
 which is called the probability amplitude:
PϕP=probability,=probability amplitude,=|ϕ|2.(1.6)
 
When an event can occur in several alternative ways, the probability amplitude for the event is the sum of the probability amplitudes for each way considered separately. There is interference:
ϕP=ϕ1+ϕ2,=|ϕ1+ϕ2|2.(1.7)
 
If an experiment is performed which is capable of determining whether one or another alternative is actually taken, the probability of the event is the sum of the probabilities for each alternative. The interference is lost:
P=P1+P2.(1.8)
One might still like to ask: “How does it work? What is the machinery behind the law?” No one has found any machinery behind the law. No one can “explain” any more than we have just “explained.” No one will give you any deeper representation of the situation. We have no ideas about a more basic mechanism from which these results can be deduced.

We would like to emphasize a very important difference between classical and quantum mechanics. We have been talking about the probability that an electron will arrive in a given circumstance. We have implied that in our experimental arrangement (or even in the best possible one) it would be impossible to predict exactly what would happen. We can only predict the odds! This would mean, if it were true, that physics has given up on the problem of trying to predict exactly what will happen in a definite circumstance. Yes! physics has given up. We do not know how to predict what would happen in a given circumstance, and we believe now that it is impossible—that the only thing that can be predicted is the probability of different events. It must be recognized that this is a retrenchment in our earlier ideal of understanding nature. It may be a backward step, but no one has seen a way to avoid it.

We make now a few remarks on a suggestion that has sometimes been made to try to avoid the description we have given: “Perhaps the electron has some kind of internal works—some inner variables—that we do not yet know about. Perhaps that is why we cannot predict what will happen. If we could look more closely at the electron, we could be able to tell where it would end up.” So far as we know, that is impossible. We would still be in difficulty. Suppose we were to assume that inside the electron there is some kind of machinery that determines where it is going to end up. That machine must also determine which hole it is going to go through on its way. But we must not forget that what is inside the electron should not be dependent on what we do, and in particular upon whether we open or close one of the holes. So if an electron, before it starts, has already made up its mind (a) which hole it is going to use, and (b) where it is going to land, we should find P1
 for those electrons that have chosen hole 1
, P2
 for those that have chosen hole 2
, and necessarily the sum P1+P2
 for those that arrive through the two holes. There seems to be no way around this. But we have verified experimentally that that is not the case. And no one has figured a way out of this puzzle. So at the present time we must limit ourselves to computing probabilities. We say “at the present time,” but we suspect very strongly that it is something that will be with us forever—that it is impossible to beat that puzzle—that this is the way nature really is.

1–8The uncertainty principle
This is the way Heisenberg stated the uncertainty principle originally: If you make the measurement on any object, and you can determine the x
-component of its momentum with an uncertainty Δp
, you cannot, at the same time, know its x
-position more accurately than Δx≥ℏ/2Δp
, where ℏ
 is a definite fixed number given by nature. It is called the “reduced Planck constant,” and is approximately 1.05×10−34
 joule-seconds. The uncertainties in the position and momentum of a particle at any instant must have their product greater than or equal to half the reduced Planck constant. This is a special case of the uncertainty principle that was stated above more generally. The more general statement was that one cannot design equipment in any way to determine which of two alternatives is taken, without, at the same time, destroying the pattern of interference.

Let us show for one particular case that the kind of relation given by Heisenberg must be true in order to keep from getting into trouble. We imagine a modification of the experiment of Fig. 1–3, in which the wall with the holes consists of a plate mounted on rollers so that it can move freely up and down (in the x
-direction), as shown in Fig. 1–6. By watching the motion of the plate carefully we can try to tell which hole an electron goes through. Imagine what happens when the detector is placed at x=0
. We would expect that an electron which passes through hole 1
 must be deflected downward by the plate to reach the detector. Since the vertical component of the electron momentum is changed, the plate must recoil with an equal momentum in the opposite direction. The plate will get an upward kick. If the electron goes through the lower hole, the plate should feel a downward kick. It is clear that for every position of the detector, the momentum received by the plate will have a different value for a traversal via hole 1
 than for a traversal via hole 2
. So! Without disturbing the electrons at all, but just by watching the plate, we can tell which path the electron used.


Fig. 1–6.An experiment in which the recoil of the wall is measured.
Now in order to do this it is necessary to know what the momentum of the screen is, before the electron goes through. So when we measure the momentum after the electron goes by, we can figure out how much the plate’s momentum has changed. But remember, according to the uncertainty principle we cannot at the same time know the position of the plate with an arbitrary accuracy. But if we do not know exactly where the plate is, we cannot say precisely where the two holes are. They will be in a different place for every electron that goes through. This means that the center of our interference pattern will have a different location for each electron. The wiggles of the interference pattern will be smeared out. We shall show quantitatively in the next chapter that if we determine the momentum of the plate sufficiently accurately to determine from the recoil measurement which hole was used, then the uncertainty in the x
-position of the plate will, according to the uncertainty principle, be enough to shift the pattern observed at the detector up and down in the x
-direction about the distance from a maximum to its nearest minimum. Such a random shift is just enough to smear out the pattern so that no interference is observed.

The uncertainty principle “protects” quantum mechanics. Heisenberg recognized that if it were possible to measure the momentum and the position simultaneously with a greater accuracy, the quantum mechanics would collapse. So he proposed that it must be impossible. Then people sat down and tried to figure out ways of doing it, and nobody could figure out a way to measure the position and the momentum of anything—a screen, an electron, a billiard ball, anything—with any greater accuracy. Quantum mechanics maintains its perilous but still correct existence.



2–1Probability wave amplitudes
In this chapter we shall discuss the relationship of the wave and particle viewpoints. We already know, from the last chapter, that neither the wave viewpoint nor the particle viewpoint is correct. We would always like to present things accurately, or at least precisely enough that they will not have to be changed when we learn more—it may be extended, but it will not be changed! But when we try to talk about the wave picture or the particle picture, both are approximate, and both will change. Therefore what we learn in this chapter will not be accurate in a certain sense; we will deal with some half-intuitive arguments which will be made more precise later. But certain things will be changed a little bit when we interpret them correctly in quantum mechanics. We are doing this so that you can have some qualitative feeling for some quantum phenomena before we get into the mathematical details of quantum mechanics. Furthermore, all our experiences are with waves and with particles, and so it is rather handy to use the wave and particle ideas to get some understanding of what happens in given circumstances before we know the complete mathematics of the quantum-mechanical amplitudes. We shall try to indicate the weakest places as we go along, but most of it is very nearly correct—it is just a matter of interpretation.

First of all, we know that the new way of representing the world in quantum mechanics—the new framework—is to give an amplitude for every event that can occur, and if the event involves the reception of one particle, then we can give the amplitude to find that one particle at different places and at different times. The probability of finding the particle is then proportional to the absolute square of the amplitude. In general, the amplitude to find a particle in different places at different times varies with position and time.

In some special case it can be that the amplitude varies sinusoidally in space and time like ei(ωt−k⋅r)
, where r
 is the vector position from some origin. (Do not forget that these amplitudes are complex numbers, not real numbers.) Such an amplitude varies according to a definite frequency ω
 and wave number k
. Then it turns out that this corresponds to a classical limiting situation where we would have believed that we have a particle whose energy E
 was known and is related to the frequency by
E=ℏω,(2.1)
and whose momentum p
 is also known and is related to the wave number by
p=ℏk.(2.2)
(The symbol ℏ
 represents the number h
 divided by 2π
; ℏ=h/2π
.)

This means that the idea of a particle is limited. The idea of a particle—its location, its momentum, etc.—which we use so much, is in certain ways unsatisfactory. For instance, if an amplitude to find a particle at different places is given by ei(ωt−k⋅r)
, whose absolute square is a constant, that would mean that the probability of finding a particle is the same at all points. That means we do not know where it is—it can be anywhere—there is a great uncertainty in its location.

On the other hand, if the position of a particle is more or less well known and we can predict it fairly accurately, then the probability of finding it in different places must be confined to a certain region, whose length we call Δx
. Outside this region, the probability is zero. Now this probability is the absolute square of an amplitude, and if the absolute square is zero, the amplitude is also zero, so that we have a wave train whose length is Δx
 (Fig. 2–1), and the wavelength (the distance between nodes of the waves in the train) of that wave train is what corresponds to the particle momentum.


Fig. 2–1.A wave packet of length Δx
.
Here we encounter a strange thing about waves; a very simple thing which has nothing to do with quantum mechanics strictly. It is something that anybody who works with waves, even if he knows no quantum mechanics, knows: namely, we cannot define a unique wavelength for a short wave train. Such a wave train does not have a definite wavelength; there is an indefiniteness in the wave number that is related to the finite length of the train, and thus there is an indefiniteness in the momentum.

2–2Measurement of position and momentum
Let us consider two examples of this idea—to see the reason that there is an uncertainty in the position and/or the momentum, if quantum mechanics is right. We have also seen before that if there were not such a thing—if it were possible to measure the position and the momentum of anything simultaneously—we would have a paradox; it is fortunate that we do not have such a paradox, and the fact that such an uncertainty comes naturally from the wave picture shows that everything is mutually consistent.


Fig. 2–2.Diffraction of particles passing through a slit.
Here is one example which shows the relationship between the position and the momentum in a circumstance that is easy to understand. Suppose we have a single slit, and particles are coming from very far away with a certain energy—so that they are all coming essentially horizontally (Fig. 2–2). We are going to concentrate on the vertical components of momentum. All of these particles have a certain horizontal momentum p0
, say, in a classical sense. So, in the classical sense, the vertical momentum py
, before the particle goes through the hole, is definitely known. The particle is moving neither up nor down, because it came from a source that is far away—and so the vertical momentum is of course zero. But now let us suppose that it goes through a hole whose width is B
. Then after it has come out through the hole, we know the position vertically—the y
-position—with considerable accuracy—namely ±B
.1 That is, the uncertainty in position, Δy
, is of order B
. Now we might also want to say, since we know the momentum is absolutely horizontal, that Δpy
 is zero; but that is wrong. We once knew the momentum was horizontal, but we do not know it any more. Before the particles passed through the hole, we did not know their vertical positions. Now that we have found the vertical position by having the particle come through the hole, we have lost our information on the vertical momentum! Why? According to the wave theory, there is a spreading out, or diffraction, of the waves after they go through the slit, just as for light. Therefore there is a certain probability that particles coming out of the slit are not coming exactly straight. The pattern is spread out by the diffraction effect, and the angle of spread, which we can define as the angle of the first minimum, is a measure of the uncertainty in the final angle.

How does the pattern become spread? To say it is spread means that there is some chance for the particle to be moving up or down, that is, to have a component of momentum up or down. We say chance and particle because we can detect this diffraction pattern with a particle counter, and when the counter receives the particle, say at C
 in Fig. 2–2, it receives the entire particle, so that, in a classical sense, the particle has a vertical momentum, in order to get from the slit up to C
.

To get a rough idea of the spread of the momentum, the vertical momentum py
 has a spread which is equal to p0Δθ
, where p0
 is the horizontal momentum. And how big is Δθ
 in the spread-out pattern? We know that the first minimum occurs at an angle Δθ
 such that the waves from one edge of the slit have to travel one wavelength farther than the waves from the other side—we worked that out before (Chapter 30 of Vol. I). Therefore Δθ
 is λ/B
, and so Δpy
 in this experiment is p0λ/B
. Note that if we make B
 smaller and make a more accurate measurement of the position of the particle, the diffraction pattern gets wider. So the narrower we make the slit, the wider the pattern gets, and the more is the likelihood that we would find that the particle has sidewise momentum. Thus the uncertainty in the vertical momentum is inversely proportional to the uncertainty of y
. In fact, we see that the product of the two is equal to p0λ
. But λ
 is the wavelength and p0
 is the momentum, and in accordance with quantum mechanics, the wavelength times the momentum is Planck’s constant h
. So we obtain the rule that the uncertainties in the vertical momentum and in the vertical position have a product of the order h
:
ΔyΔpy≥ℏ/2.(2.3)
We cannot prepare a system in which we know the vertical position of a particle and can predict how it will move vertically with greater certainty than given by (2.3). That is, the uncertainty in the vertical momentum must exceed ℏ/2Δy
, where Δy
 is the uncertainty in our knowledge of the position.

Sometimes people say quantum mechanics is all wrong. When the particle arrived from the left, its vertical momentum was zero. And now that it has gone through the slit, its position is known. Both position and momentum seem to be known with arbitrary accuracy. It is quite true that we can receive a particle, and on reception determine what its position is and what its momentum would have had to have been to have gotten there. That is true, but that is not what the uncertainty relation (2.3) refers to. Equation (2.3) refers to the predictability of a situation, not remarks about the past. It does no good to say “I knew what the momentum was before it went through the slit, and now I know the position,” because now the momentum knowledge is lost. The fact that it went through the slit no longer permits us to predict the vertical momentum. We are talking about a predictive theory, not just measurements after the fact. So we must talk about what we can predict.

Now let us take the thing the other way around. Let us take another example of the same phenomenon, a little more quantitatively. In the previous example we measured the momentum by a classical method. Namely, we considered the direction and the velocity and the angles, etc., so we got the momentum by classical analysis. But since momentum is related to wave number, there exists in nature still another way to measure the momentum of a particle—photon or otherwise—which has no classical analog, because it uses Eq. (2.2). We measure the wavelengths of the waves. Let us try to measure momentum in this way.


Fig. 2–3.Determination of momentum by using a diffraction grating.
Suppose we have a grating with a large number of lines (Fig. 2–3), and send a beam of particles at the grating. We have often discussed this problem: if the particles have a definite momentum, then we get a very sharp pattern in a certain direction, because of the interference. And we have also talked about how accurately we can determine that momentum, that is to say, what the resolving power of such a grating is. Rather than derive it again, we refer to Chapter 30 of Volume I, where we found that the relative uncertainty in the wavelength that can be measured with a given grating is 1/Nm
, where N
 is the number of lines on the grating and m
 is the order of the diffraction pattern. That is,
Δλ/λ=1/Nm.(2.4)

Now formula (2.4) can be rewritten as
Δλ/λ2=1/Nmλ=1/L,(2.5)
where L
 is the distance shown in Fig. 2–3. This distance is the difference between the total distance that the particle or wave or whatever it is has to travel if it is reflected from the bottom of the grating, and the distance that it has to travel if it is reflected from the top of the grating. That is, the waves which form the diffraction pattern are waves which come from different parts of the grating. The first ones that arrive come from the bottom end of the grating, from the beginning of the wave train, and the rest of them come from later parts of the wave train, coming from different parts of the grating, until the last one finally arrives, and that involves a point in the wave train a distance L
 behind the first point. So in order that we shall have a sharp line in our spectrum corresponding to a definite momentum, with an uncertainty given by (2.4), we have to have a wave train of at least length L
. If the wave train is too short, we are not using the entire grating. The waves which form the spectrum are being reflected from only a very short sector of the grating if the wave train is too short, and the grating will not work right—we will find a big angular spread. In order to get a narrower one, we need to use the whole grating, so that at least at some moment the whole wave train is scattering simultaneously from all parts of the grating. Thus the wave train must be of length L
 in order to have an uncertainty in the wavelength less than that given by (2.5). Incidentally,
Δλ/λ2=Δ(1/λ)=Δk/2π.(2.6)
Therefore
Δk=2π/L,(2.7)
where L
 is the length of the wave train.

This means that if we have a wave train whose length is less than L
, the uncertainty in the wave number must exceed 2π/L
. Or the uncertainty in a wave number times the length of the wave train—we will call that for a moment Δx
—exceeds 2π
. We call it Δx
 because that is the uncertainty in the location of the particle. If the wave train exists only in a finite length, then that is where we could find the particle, within an uncertainty Δx
. Now this property of waves, that the length of the wave train times the uncertainty of the wave number associated with it is at least 2π
, is a property that is known to everyone who studies them. It has nothing to do with quantum mechanics. It is simply that if we have a finite train, we cannot count the waves in it very precisely.

Let us try another way to see the reason for that. Suppose that we have a finite train of length L
; then because of the way it has to decrease at the ends, as in Fig. 2–1, the number of waves in the length L
 is uncertain by something like ±1
. But the number of waves in L
 is kL/2π
. Thus k
 is uncertain, and we again get the result (2.7), a property merely of waves. The same thing works whether the waves are in space and k
 is the number of radians per centimeter and L
 is the length of the train, or the waves are in time and ω
 is the number of radians per second and T
 is the “length” in time that the wave train comes in. That is, if we have a wave train lasting only for a certain finite time T
, then the uncertainty in the frequency is given by
Δω=2π/T.(2.8)
We have tried to emphasize that these are properties of waves alone, and they are well known, for example, in the theory of sound.

The point is that in quantum mechanics we interpret the wave number as being a measure of the momentum of a particle, with the rule that p=ℏk
, so that relation (2.7) tells us that Δp≈h/Δx
. This, then, is a limitation of the classical idea of momentum. (Naturally, it has to be limited in some ways if we are going to represent particles by waves!) It is nice that we have found a rule that gives us some idea of when there is a failure of classical ideas.

2–3Crystal diffraction
Next let us consider the reflection of particle waves from a crystal. A crystal is a thick thing which has a whole lot of similar atoms—we will include some complications later—in a nice array. The question is how to set the array so that we get a strong reflected maximum in a given direction for a given beam of, say, light (x-rays), electrons, neutrons, or anything else. In order to obtain a strong reflection, the scattering from all of the atoms must be in phase. There cannot be equal numbers in phase and out of phase, or the waves will cancel out. The way to arrange things is to find the regions of constant phase, as we have already explained; they are planes which make equal angles with the initial and final directions (Fig. 2–4).


Fig. 2–4.Scattering of waves by crystal planes.
If we consider two parallel planes, as in Fig. 2–4, the waves scattered from the two planes will be in phase, provided the difference in distance traveled by a wave front is an integral number of wavelengths. This difference can be seen to be 2dsinθ
, where d
 is the perpendicular distance between the planes. Thus the condition for coherent reflection is
2dsinθ=nλ(n=1,2,…).(2.9)

If, for example, the crystal is such that the atoms happen to lie on planes obeying condition (2.9) with n=1
, then there will be a strong reflection. If, on the other hand, there are other atoms of the same nature (equal in density) halfway between, then the intermediate planes will also scatter equally strongly and will interfere with the others and produce no effect. So d
 in (2.9) must refer to adjacent planes; we cannot take a plane five layers farther back and use this formula!

As a matter of interest, actual crystals are not usually as simple as a single kind of atom repeated in a certain way. Instead, if we make a two-dimensional analog, they are much like wallpaper, in which there is some kind of figure which repeats all over the wallpaper. By “figure” we mean, in the case of atoms, some arrangement—calcium and a carbon and three oxygens, etc., for calcium carbonate, and so on—which may involve a relatively large number of atoms. But whatever it is, the figure is repeated in a pattern. This basic figure is called a unit cell.

The basic pattern of repetition defines what we call the lattice type; the lattice type can be immediately determined by looking at the reflections and seeing what their symmetry is. In other words, where we find any reflections at all determines the lattice type, but in order to determine what is in each of the elements of the lattice one must take into account the intensity of the scattering at the various directions. Which directions scatter depends on the type of lattice, but how strongly each scatters is determined by what is inside each unit cell, and in that way the structure of crystals is worked out.

Two photographs of x-ray diffraction patterns are shown in Figs. 2–5 and 2–6; they illustrate scattering from rock salt and myoglobin, respectively.


Figure 2–5
 
Figure 2–6
Incidentally, an interesting thing happens if the spacings of the nearest planes are less than λ/2
. In this case (2.9) has no solution for n
. Thus if λ
 is bigger than twice the distance between adjacent planes, then there is no side diffraction pattern, and the light—or whatever it is—will go right through the material without bouncing off or getting lost. So in the case of light, where λ
 is much bigger than the spacing, of course it does go through and there is no pattern of reflection from the planes of the crystal.


Fig. 2–7.Diffusion of pile neutrons through graphite block.
This fact also has an interesting consequence in the case of piles which make neutrons (these are obviously particles, for anybody’s money!). If we take these neutrons and let them into a long block of graphite, the neutrons diffuse and work their way along (Fig. 2–7). They diffuse because they are bounced by the atoms, but strictly, in the wave theory, they are bounced by the atoms because of diffraction from the crystal planes. It turns out that if we take a very long piece of graphite, the neutrons that come out the far end are all of long wavelength! In fact, if one plots the intensity as a function of wavelength, we get nothing except for wavelengths longer than a certain minimum (Fig. 2–8). In other words, we can get very slow neutrons that way. Only the slowest neutrons come through; they are not diffracted or scattered by the crystal planes of the graphite, but keep going right through like light through glass, and are not scattered out the sides. There are many other demonstrations of the reality of neutron waves and waves of other particles.


Fig. 2–8.Intensity of neutrons out of graphite rod as function of wavelength.
2–4The size of an atom
We now consider another application of the uncertainty relation, Eq. (2.3). It must not be taken too seriously; the idea is right but the analysis is not very accurate. The idea has to do with the determination of the size of atoms, and the fact that, classically, the electrons would radiate light and spiral in until they settle down right on top of the nucleus. But that cannot be right quantum-mechanically because then we would know where each electron was and how fast it was moving.

Suppose we have a hydrogen atom, and measure the position of the electron; we must not be able to predict exactly where the electron will be, or the momentum spread will then turn out to be infinite. Every time we look at the electron, it is somewhere, but it has an amplitude to be in different places so there is a probability of it being found in different places. These places cannot all be at the nucleus; we shall suppose there is a spread in position of order a
. That is, the distance of the electron from the nucleus is usually about a
. We shall determine a
 by minimizing the total energy of the atom.

The spread in momentum is roughly ℏ/a
 because of the uncertainty relation, so that if we try to measure the momentum of the electron in some manner, such as by scattering x-rays off it and looking for the Doppler effect from a moving scatterer, we would expect not to get zero every time—the electron is not standing still—but the momenta must be of the order p≈ℏ/a
. Then the kinetic energy is roughly 12mv2=
 p2/2m=
 ℏ2/2ma2
. (In a sense, this is a kind of dimensional analysis to find out in what way the kinetic energy depends upon the reduced Planck constant, upon m
, and upon the size of the atom. We need not trust our answer to within factors like 2
, π
, etc. We have not even defined a
 very precisely.) Now the potential energy is minus e2
 over the distance from the center, say −e2/a
, where, as defined in Volume I, e2
 is the charge of an electron squared, divided by 4πϵ0
. Now the point is that the potential energy is reduced if a
 gets smaller, but the smaller a
 is, the higher the momentum required, because of the uncertainty principle, and therefore the higher the kinetic energy. The total energy is
E=ℏ2/2ma2−e2/a.(2.10)
We do not know what a
 is, but we know that the atom is going to arrange itself to make some kind of compromise so that the energy is as little as possible. In order to minimize E
, we differentiate with respect to a
, set the derivative equal to zero, and solve for a
. The derivative of E
 is
dE/da=−ℏ2/ma3+e2/a2,(2.11)
and setting dE/da=0
 gives for a
 the value
a0=ℏ2/me2=0.529 angstrom,=0.529×10−10 meter.(2.12)
This particular distance is called the Bohr radius, and we have thus learned that atomic dimensions are of the order of angstroms, which is right. This is pretty good—in fact, it is amazing, since until now we have had no basis for understanding the size of atoms! Atoms are completely impossible from the classical point of view, since the electrons would spiral into the nucleus.

Now if we put the value (2.12) for a0
 into (2.10) to find the energy, it comes out
E0=−e2/2a0=−me4/2ℏ2=−13.6 eV.(2.13)
What does a negative energy mean? It means that the electron has less energy when it is in the atom than when it is free. It means it is bound. It means it takes energy to kick the electron out; it takes energy of the order of 13.6
 eV to ionize a hydrogen atom. We have no reason to think that it is not two or three times this—or half of this—or (1/π)
 times this, because we have used such a sloppy argument. However, we have cheated, we have used all the constants in such a way that it happens to come out the right number! This number, 13.6
 electron volts, is called a Rydberg of energy; it is the ionization energy of hydrogen.

So we now understand why we do not fall through the floor. As we walk, our shoes with their masses of atoms push against the floor with its mass of atoms. In order to squash the atoms closer together, the electrons would be confined to a smaller space and, by the uncertainty principle, their momenta would have to be higher on the average, and that means high energy; the resistance to atomic compression is a quantum-mechanical effect and not a classical effect. Classically, we would expect that if we were to draw all the electrons and protons closer together, the energy would be reduced still further, and the best arrangement of positive and negative charges in classical physics is all on top of each other. This was well known in classical physics and was a puzzle because of the existence of the atom. Of course, the early scientists invented some ways out of the trouble—but never mind, we have the right way out, now!

Incidentally, although we have no reason to understand it at the moment, in a situation where there are many electrons it turns out that they try to keep away from each other. If one electron is occupying a certain space, then another does not occupy the same space. More precisely, there are two spin cases, so that two can sit on top of each other, one spinning one way and one the other way. But after that we cannot put any more there. We have to put others in another place, and that is the real reason that matter has strength. If we could put all the electrons in the same place, it would condense even more than it does. It is the fact that the electrons cannot all get on top of each other that makes tables and everything else solid.

Obviously, in order to understand the properties of matter, we will have to use quantum mechanics and not be satisfied with classical mechanics.

2–5Energy levels
We have talked about the atom in its lowest possible energy condition, but it turns out that the electron can do other things. It can jiggle and wiggle in a more energetic manner, and so there are many different possible motions for the atom. According to quantum mechanics, in a stationary condition there can only be definite energies for an atom. We make a diagram (Fig. 2–9) in which we plot the energy vertically, and we make a horizontal line for each allowed value of the energy. When the electron is free, i.e., when its energy is positive, it can have any energy; it can be moving at any speed. But bound energies are not arbitrary. The atom must have one or another out of a set of allowed values, such as those in Fig. 2–9.


Fig. 2–9.Energy diagram for an atom, showing several possible transitions.
Now let us call the allowed values of the energy E0
, E1
, E2
, E3
. If an atom is initially in one of these “excited states,” E1
, E2
, etc., it does not remain in that state forever. Sooner or later it drops to a lower state and radiates energy in the form of light. The frequency of the light that is emitted is determined by conservation of energy plus the quantum-mechanical understanding that the frequency of the light is related to the energy of the light by (2.1). Therefore the frequency of the light which is liberated in a transition from energy E3
 to energy E1
 (for example) is
ω31=(E3−E1)/ℏ.(2.14)
This, then, is a characteristic frequency of the atom and defines a spectral emission line. Another possible transition would be from E3
 to E0
. That would have a different frequency
ω30=(E3−E0)/ℏ.(2.15)
Another possibility is that if the atom were excited to the state E1
 it could drop to the ground state E0
, emitting a photon of frequency
ω10=(E1−E0)/ℏ.(2.16)
The reason we bring up three transitions is to point out an interesting relationship. It is easy to see from (2.14), (2.15), and (2.16) that
ω30=ω31+ω10.(2.17)
In general, if we find two spectral lines, we shall expect to find another line at the sum of the frequencies (or the difference in the frequencies), and that all the lines can be understood by finding a series of levels such that every line corresponds to the difference in energy of some pair of levels. This remarkable coincidence in spectral frequencies was noted before quantum mechanics was discovered, and it is called the Ritz combination principle. This is again a mystery from the point of view of classical mechanics. Let us not belabor the point that classical mechanics is a failure in the atomic domain; we seem to have demonstrated that pretty well.

We have already talked about quantum mechanics as being represented by amplitudes which behave like waves, with certain frequencies and wave numbers. Let us observe how it comes about from the point of view of amplitudes that the atom has definite energy states. This is something we cannot understand from what has been said so far, but we are all familiar with the fact that confined waves have definite frequencies. For instance, if sound is confined to an organ pipe, or anything like that, then there is more than one way that the sound can vibrate, but for each such way there is a definite frequency. Thus an object in which the waves are confined has certain resonance frequencies. It is therefore a property of waves in a confined space—a subject which we will discuss in detail with formulas later on—that they exist only at definite frequencies. And since the general relation exists between frequencies of the amplitude and energy, we are not surprised to find definite energies associated with electrons bound in atoms.

2–6Philosophical implications
Let us consider briefly some philosophical implications of quantum mechanics. As always, there are two aspects of the problem: one is the philosophical implication for physics, and the other is the extrapolation of philosophical matters to other fields. When philosophical ideas associated with science are dragged into another field, they are usually completely distorted. Therefore we shall confine our remarks as much as possible to physics itself.

First of all, the most interesting aspect is the idea of the uncertainty principle; making an observation affects the phenomenon. It has always been known that making observations affects a phenomenon, but the point is that the effect cannot be disregarded or minimized or decreased arbitrarily by rearranging the apparatus. When we look for a certain phenomenon we cannot help but disturb it in a certain minimum way, and the disturbance is necessary for the consistency of the viewpoint. The observer was sometimes important in prequantum physics, but only in a trivial sense. The problem has been raised: if a tree falls in a forest and there is nobody there to hear it, does it make a noise? A real tree falling in a real forest makes a sound, of course, even if nobody is there. Even if no one is present to hear it, there are other traces left. The sound will shake some leaves, and if we were careful enough we might find somewhere that some thorn had rubbed against a leaf and made a tiny scratch that could not be explained unless we assumed the leaf were vibrating. So in a certain sense we would have to admit that there is a sound made. We might ask: was there a sensation of sound? No, sensations have to do, presumably, with consciousness. And whether ants are conscious and whether there were ants in the forest, or whether the tree was conscious, we do not know. Let us leave the problem in that form.

Another thing that people have emphasized since quantum mechanics was developed is the idea that we should not speak about those things which we cannot measure. (Actually relativity theory also said this.) Unless a thing can be defined by measurement, it has no place in a theory. And since an accurate value of the momentum of a localized particle cannot be defined by measurement it therefore has no place in the theory. The idea that this is what was the matter with classical theory is a false position. It is a careless analysis of the situation. Just because we cannot measure position and momentum precisely does not a priori mean that we cannot talk about them. It only means that we need not talk about them. The situation in the sciences is this: A concept or an idea which cannot be measured or cannot be referred directly to experiment may or may not be useful. It need not exist in a theory. In other words, suppose we compare the classical theory of the world with the quantum theory of the world, and suppose that it is true experimentally that we can measure position and momentum only imprecisely. The question is whether the ideas of the exact position of a particle and the exact momentum of a particle are valid or not. The classical theory admits the ideas; the quantum theory does not. This does not in itself mean that classical physics is wrong. When the new quantum mechanics was discovered, the classical people—which included everybody except Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and Born—said: “Look, your theory is not any good because you cannot answer certain questions like: what is the exact position of a particle?, which hole does it go through?, and some others.” Heisenberg’s answer was: “I do not need to answer such questions because you cannot ask such a question experimentally.” It is that we do not have to. Consider two theories (a) and (b); (a) contains an idea that cannot be checked directly but which is used in the analysis, and the other, (b), does not contain the idea. If they disagree in their predictions, one could not claim that (b) is false because it cannot explain this idea that is in (a), because that idea is one of the things that cannot be checked directly. It is always good to know which ideas cannot be checked directly, but it is not necessary to remove them all. It is not true that we can pursue science completely by using only those concepts which are directly subject to experiment.

In quantum mechanics itself there is a probability amplitude, there is a potential, and there are many constructs that we cannot measure directly. The basis of a science is its ability to predict. To predict means to tell what will happen in an experiment that has never been done. How can we do that? By assuming that we know what is there, independent of the experiment. We must extrapolate the experiments to a region where they have not been done. We must take our concepts and extend them to places where they have not yet been checked. If we do not do that, we have no prediction. So it was perfectly sensible for the classical physicists to go happily along and suppose that the position—which obviously means something for a baseball—meant something also for an electron. It was not stupidity. It was a sensible procedure. Today we say that the law of relativity is supposed to be true at all energies, but someday somebody may come along and say how stupid we were. We do not know where we are “stupid” until we “stick our neck out,” and so the whole idea is to put our neck out. And the only way to find out that we are wrong is to find out what our predictions are. It is absolutely necessary to make constructs.

We have already made a few remarks about the indeterminacy of quantum mechanics. That is, that we are unable now to predict what will happen in physics in a given physical circumstance which is arranged as carefully as possible. If we have an atom that is in an excited state and so is going to emit a photon, we cannot say when it will emit the photon. It has a certain amplitude to emit the photon at any time, and we can predict only a probability for emission; we cannot predict the future exactly. This has given rise to all kinds of nonsense and questions on the meaning of freedom of will, and of the idea that the world is uncertain.

Of course we must emphasize that classical physics is also indeterminate, in a sense. It is usually thought that this indeterminacy, that we cannot predict the future, is an important quantum-mechanical thing, and this is said to explain the behavior of the mind, feelings of free will, etc. But if the world were classical—if the laws of mechanics were classical—it is not quite obvious that the mind would not feel more or less the same. It is true classically that if we knew the position and the velocity of every particle in the world, or in a box of gas, we could predict exactly what would happen. And therefore the classical world is deterministic. Suppose, however, that we have a finite accuracy and do not know exactly where just one atom is, say to one part in a billion. Then as it goes along it hits another atom, and because we did not know the position better than to one part in a billion, we find an even larger error in the position after the collision. And that is amplified, of course, in the next collision, so that if we start with only a tiny error it rapidly magnifies to a very great uncertainty. To give an example: if water falls over a dam, it splashes. If we stand nearby, every now and then a drop will land on our nose. This appears to be completely random, yet such a behavior would be predicted by purely classical laws. The exact position of all the drops depends upon the precise wigglings of the water before it goes over the dam. How? The tiniest irregularities are magnified in falling, so that we get complete randomness. Obviously, we cannot really predict the position of the drops unless we know the motion of the water absolutely exactly.

Speaking more precisely, given an arbitrary accuracy, no matter how precise, one can find a time long enough that we cannot make predictions valid for that long a time. Now the point is that this length of time is not very large. It is not that the time is millions of years if the accuracy is one part in a billion. The time goes, in fact, only logarithmically with the error, and it turns out that in only a very, very tiny time we lose all our information. If the accuracy is taken to be one part in billions and billions and billions—no matter how many billions we wish, provided we do stop somewhere—then we can find a time less than the time it took to state the accuracy—after which we can no longer predict what is going to happen! It is therefore not fair to say that from the apparent freedom and indeterminacy of the human mind, we should have realized that classical “deterministic” physics could not ever hope to understand it, and to welcome quantum mechanics as a release from a “completely mechanistic” universe. For already in classical mechanics there was indeterminability from a practical point of view.



===  CHAPTER 2 : THE RELATION OF WAVE AND PARTICEL VIEWPOINT  ===

2–1Probability wave amplitudes
In this chapter we shall discuss the relationship of the wave and particle viewpoints. We already know, from the last chapter, that neither the wave viewpoint nor the particle viewpoint is correct. We would always like to present things accurately, or at least precisely enough that they will not have to be changed when we learn more—it may be extended, but it will not be changed! But when we try to talk about the wave picture or the particle picture, both are approximate, and both will change. Therefore what we learn in this chapter will not be accurate in a certain sense; we will deal with some half-intuitive arguments which will be made more precise later. But certain things will be changed a little bit when we interpret them correctly in quantum mechanics. We are doing this so that you can have some qualitative feeling for some quantum phenomena before we get into the mathematical details of quantum mechanics. Furthermore, all our experiences are with waves and with particles, and so it is rather handy to use the wave and particle ideas to get some understanding of what happens in given circumstances before we know the complete mathematics of the quantum-mechanical amplitudes. We shall try to indicate the weakest places as we go along, but most of it is very nearly correct—it is just a matter of interpretation.

First of all, we know that the new way of representing the world in quantum mechanics—the new framework—is to give an amplitude for every event that can occur, and if the event involves the reception of one particle, then we can give the amplitude to find that one particle at different places and at different times. The probability of finding the particle is then proportional to the absolute square of the amplitude. In general, the amplitude to find a particle in different places at different times varies with position and time.

In some special case it can be that the amplitude varies sinusoidally in space and time like ei(ωt−k⋅r)
, where r
 is the vector position from some origin. (Do not forget that these amplitudes are complex numbers, not real numbers.) Such an amplitude varies according to a definite frequency ω
 and wave number k
. Then it turns out that this corresponds to a classical limiting situation where we would have believed that we have a particle whose energy E
 was known and is related to the frequency by
E=ℏω,(2.1)
and whose momentum p
 is also known and is related to the wave number by
p=ℏk.(2.2)
(The symbol ℏ
 represents the number h
 divided by 2π
; ℏ=h/2π
.)

This means that the idea of a particle is limited. The idea of a particle—its location, its momentum, etc.—which we use so much, is in certain ways unsatisfactory. For instance, if an amplitude to find a particle at different places is given by ei(ωt−k⋅r)
, whose absolute square is a constant, that would mean that the probability of finding a particle is the same at all points. That means we do not know where it is—it can be anywhere—there is a great uncertainty in its location.

On the other hand, if the position of a particle is more or less well known and we can predict it fairly accurately, then the probability of finding it in different places must be confined to a certain region, whose length we call Δx
. Outside this region, the probability is zero. Now this probability is the absolute square of an amplitude, and if the absolute square is zero, the amplitude is also zero, so that we have a wave train whose length is Δx
 (Fig. 2–1), and the wavelength (the distance between nodes of the waves in the train) of that wave train is what corresponds to the particle momentum.


Fig. 2–1.A wave packet of length Δx
.
Here we encounter a strange thing about waves; a very simple thing which has nothing to do with quantum mechanics strictly. It is something that anybody who works with waves, even if he knows no quantum mechanics, knows: namely, we cannot define a unique wavelength for a short wave train. Such a wave train does not have a definite wavelength; there is an indefiniteness in the wave number that is related to the finite length of the train, and thus there is an indefiniteness in the momentum.

2–2Measurement of position and momentum
Let us consider two examples of this idea—to see the reason that there is an uncertainty in the position and/or the momentum, if quantum mechanics is right. We have also seen before that if there were not such a thing—if it were possible to measure the position and the momentum of anything simultaneously—we would have a paradox; it is fortunate that we do not have such a paradox, and the fact that such an uncertainty comes naturally from the wave picture shows that everything is mutually consistent.


Fig. 2–2.Diffraction of particles passing through a slit.
Here is one example which shows the relationship between the position and the momentum in a circumstance that is easy to understand. Suppose we have a single slit, and particles are coming from very far away with a certain energy—so that they are all coming essentially horizontally (Fig. 2–2). We are going to concentrate on the vertical components of momentum. All of these particles have a certain horizontal momentum p0
, say, in a classical sense. So, in the classical sense, the vertical momentum py
, before the particle goes through the hole, is definitely known. The particle is moving neither up nor down, because it came from a source that is far away—and so the vertical momentum is of course zero. But now let us suppose that it goes through a hole whose width is B
. Then after it has come out through the hole, we know the position vertically—the y
-position—with considerable accuracy—namely ±B
.1 That is, the uncertainty in position, Δy
, is of order B
. Now we might also want to say, since we know the momentum is absolutely horizontal, that Δpy
 is zero; but that is wrong. We once knew the momentum was horizontal, but we do not know it any more. Before the particles passed through the hole, we did not know their vertical positions. Now that we have found the vertical position by having the particle come through the hole, we have lost our information on the vertical momentum! Why? According to the wave theory, there is a spreading out, or diffraction, of the waves after they go through the slit, just as for light. Therefore there is a certain probability that particles coming out of the slit are not coming exactly straight. The pattern is spread out by the diffraction effect, and the angle of spread, which we can define as the angle of the first minimum, is a measure of the uncertainty in the final angle.

How does the pattern become spread? To say it is spread means that there is some chance for the particle to be moving up or down, that is, to have a component of momentum up or down. We say chance and particle because we can detect this diffraction pattern with a particle counter, and when the counter receives the particle, say at C
 in Fig. 2–2, it receives the entire particle, so that, in a classical sense, the particle has a vertical momentum, in order to get from the slit up to C
.

To get a rough idea of the spread of the momentum, the vertical momentum py
 has a spread which is equal to p0Δθ
, where p0
 is the horizontal momentum. And how big is Δθ
 in the spread-out pattern? We know that the first minimum occurs at an angle Δθ
 such that the waves from one edge of the slit have to travel one wavelength farther than the waves from the other side—we worked that out before (Chapter 30 of Vol. I). Therefore Δθ
 is λ/B
, and so Δpy
 in this experiment is p0λ/B
. Note that if we make B
 smaller and make a more accurate measurement of the position of the particle, the diffraction pattern gets wider. So the narrower we make the slit, the wider the pattern gets, and the more is the likelihood that we would find that the particle has sidewise momentum. Thus the uncertainty in the vertical momentum is inversely proportional to the uncertainty of y
. In fact, we see that the product of the two is equal to p0λ
. But λ
 is the wavelength and p0
 is the momentum, and in accordance with quantum mechanics, the wavelength times the momentum is Planck’s constant h
. So we obtain the rule that the uncertainties in the vertical momentum and in the vertical position have a product of the order h
:
ΔyΔpy≥ℏ/2.(2.3)
We cannot prepare a system in which we know the vertical position of a particle and can predict how it will move vertically with greater certainty than given by (2.3). That is, the uncertainty in the vertical momentum must exceed ℏ/2Δy
, where Δy
 is the uncertainty in our knowledge of the position.

Sometimes people say quantum mechanics is all wrong. When the particle arrived from the left, its vertical momentum was zero. And now that it has gone through the slit, its position is known. Both position and momentum seem to be known with arbitrary accuracy. It is quite true that we can receive a particle, and on reception determine what its position is and what its momentum would have had to have been to have gotten there. That is true, but that is not what the uncertainty relation (2.3) refers to. Equation (2.3) refers to the predictability of a situation, not remarks about the past. It does no good to say “I knew what the momentum was before it went through the slit, and now I know the position,” because now the momentum knowledge is lost. The fact that it went through the slit no longer permits us to predict the vertical momentum. We are talking about a predictive theory, not just measurements after the fact. So we must talk about what we can predict.

Now let us take the thing the other way around. Let us take another example of the same phenomenon, a little more quantitatively. In the previous example we measured the momentum by a classical method. Namely, we considered the direction and the velocity and the angles, etc., so we got the momentum by classical analysis. But since momentum is related to wave number, there exists in nature still another way to measure the momentum of a particle—photon or otherwise—which has no classical analog, because it uses Eq. (2.2). We measure the wavelengths of the waves. Let us try to measure momentum in this way.


Fig. 2–3.Determination of momentum by using a diffraction grating.
Suppose we have a grating with a large number of lines (Fig. 2–3), and send a beam of particles at the grating. We have often discussed this problem: if the particles have a definite momentum, then we get a very sharp pattern in a certain direction, because of the interference. And we have also talked about how accurately we can determine that momentum, that is to say, what the resolving power of such a grating is. Rather than derive it again, we refer to Chapter 30 of Volume I, where we found that the relative uncertainty in the wavelength that can be measured with a given grating is 1/Nm
, where N
 is the number of lines on the grating and m
 is the order of the diffraction pattern. That is,
Δλ/λ=1/Nm.(2.4)

Now formula (2.4) can be rewritten as
Δλ/λ2=1/Nmλ=1/L,(2.5)
where L
 is the distance shown in Fig. 2–3. This distance is the difference between the total distance that the particle or wave or whatever it is has to travel if it is reflected from the bottom of the grating, and the distance that it has to travel if it is reflected from the top of the grating. That is, the waves which form the diffraction pattern are waves which come from different parts of the grating. The first ones that arrive come from the bottom end of the grating, from the beginning of the wave train, and the rest of them come from later parts of the wave train, coming from different parts of the grating, until the last one finally arrives, and that involves a point in the wave train a distance L
 behind the first point. So in order that we shall have a sharp line in our spectrum corresponding to a definite momentum, with an uncertainty given by (2.4), we have to have a wave train of at least length L
. If the wave train is too short, we are not using the entire grating. The waves which form the spectrum are being reflected from only a very short sector of the grating if the wave train is too short, and the grating will not work right—we will find a big angular spread. In order to get a narrower one, we need to use the whole grating, so that at least at some moment the whole wave train is scattering simultaneously from all parts of the grating. Thus the wave train must be of length L
 in order to have an uncertainty in the wavelength less than that given by (2.5). Incidentally,
Δλ/λ2=Δ(1/λ)=Δk/2π.(2.6)
Therefore
Δk=2π/L,(2.7)
where L
 is the length of the wave train.

This means that if we have a wave train whose length is less than L
, the uncertainty in the wave number must exceed 2π/L
. Or the uncertainty in a wave number times the length of the wave train—we will call that for a moment Δx
—exceeds 2π
. We call it Δx
 because that is the uncertainty in the location of the particle. If the wave train exists only in a finite length, then that is where we could find the particle, within an uncertainty Δx
. Now this property of waves, that the length of the wave train times the uncertainty of the wave number associated with it is at least 2π
, is a property that is known to everyone who studies them. It has nothing to do with quantum mechanics. It is simply that if we have a finite train, we cannot count the waves in it very precisely.

Let us try another way to see the reason for that. Suppose that we have a finite train of length L
; then because of the way it has to decrease at the ends, as in Fig. 2–1, the number of waves in the length L
 is uncertain by something like ±1
. But the number of waves in L
 is kL/2π
. Thus k
 is uncertain, and we again get the result (2.7), a property merely of waves. The same thing works whether the waves are in space and k
 is the number of radians per centimeter and L
 is the length of the train, or the waves are in time and ω
 is the number of radians per second and T
 is the “length” in time that the wave train comes in. That is, if we have a wave train lasting only for a certain finite time T
, then the uncertainty in the frequency is given by
Δω=2π/T.(2.8)
We have tried to emphasize that these are properties of waves alone, and they are well known, for example, in the theory of sound.

The point is that in quantum mechanics we interpret the wave number as being a measure of the momentum of a particle, with the rule that p=ℏk
, so that relation (2.7) tells us that Δp≈h/Δx
. This, then, is a limitation of the classical idea of momentum. (Naturally, it has to be limited in some ways if we are going to represent particles by waves!) It is nice that we have found a rule that gives us some idea of when there is a failure of classical ideas.

2–3Crystal diffraction
Next let us consider the reflection of particle waves from a crystal. A crystal is a thick thing which has a whole lot of similar atoms—we will include some complications later—in a nice array. The question is how to set the array so that we get a strong reflected maximum in a given direction for a given beam of, say, light (x-rays), electrons, neutrons, or anything else. In order to obtain a strong reflection, the scattering from all of the atoms must be in phase. There cannot be equal numbers in phase and out of phase, or the waves will cancel out. The way to arrange things is to find the regions of constant phase, as we have already explained; they are planes which make equal angles with the initial and final directions (Fig. 2–4).


Fig. 2–4.Scattering of waves by crystal planes.
If we consider two parallel planes, as in Fig. 2–4, the waves scattered from the two planes will be in phase, provided the difference in distance traveled by a wave front is an integral number of wavelengths. This difference can be seen to be 2dsinθ
, where d
 is the perpendicular distance between the planes. Thus the condition for coherent reflection is
2dsinθ=nλ(n=1,2,…).(2.9)

If, for example, the crystal is such that the atoms happen to lie on planes obeying condition (2.9) with n=1
, then there will be a strong reflection. If, on the other hand, there are other atoms of the same nature (equal in density) halfway between, then the intermediate planes will also scatter equally strongly and will interfere with the others and produce no effect. So d
 in (2.9) must refer to adjacent planes; we cannot take a plane five layers farther back and use this formula!

As a matter of interest, actual crystals are not usually as simple as a single kind of atom repeated in a certain way. Instead, if we make a two-dimensional analog, they are much like wallpaper, in which there is some kind of figure which repeats all over the wallpaper. By “figure” we mean, in the case of atoms, some arrangement—calcium and a carbon and three oxygens, etc., for calcium carbonate, and so on—which may involve a relatively large number of atoms. But whatever it is, the figure is repeated in a pattern. This basic figure is called a unit cell.

The basic pattern of repetition defines what we call the lattice type; the lattice type can be immediately determined by looking at the reflections and seeing what their symmetry is. In other words, where we find any reflections at all determines the lattice type, but in order to determine what is in each of the elements of the lattice one must take into account the intensity of the scattering at the various directions. Which directions scatter depends on the type of lattice, but how strongly each scatters is determined by what is inside each unit cell, and in that way the structure of crystals is worked out.

Two photographs of x-ray diffraction patterns are shown in Figs. 2–5 and 2–6; they illustrate scattering from rock salt and myoglobin, respectively.


Figure 2–5
 
Figure 2–6
Incidentally, an interesting thing happens if the spacings of the nearest planes are less than λ/2
. In this case (2.9) has no solution for n
. Thus if λ
 is bigger than twice the distance between adjacent planes, then there is no side diffraction pattern, and the light—or whatever it is—will go right through the material without bouncing off or getting lost. So in the case of light, where λ
 is much bigger than the spacing, of course it does go through and there is no pattern of reflection from the planes of the crystal.


Fig. 2–7.Diffusion of pile neutrons through graphite block.
This fact also has an interesting consequence in the case of piles which make neutrons (these are obviously particles, for anybody’s money!). If we take these neutrons and let them into a long block of graphite, the neutrons diffuse and work their way along (Fig. 2–7). They diffuse because they are bounced by the atoms, but strictly, in the wave theory, they are bounced by the atoms because of diffraction from the crystal planes. It turns out that if we take a very long piece of graphite, the neutrons that come out the far end are all of long wavelength! In fact, if one plots the intensity as a function of wavelength, we get nothing except for wavelengths longer than a certain minimum (Fig. 2–8). In other words, we can get very slow neutrons that way. Only the slowest neutrons come through; they are not diffracted or scattered by the crystal planes of the graphite, but keep going right through like light through glass, and are not scattered out the sides. There are many other demonstrations of the reality of neutron waves and waves of other particles.


Fig. 2–8.Intensity of neutrons out of graphite rod as function of wavelength.
2–4The size of an atom
We now consider another application of the uncertainty relation, Eq. (2.3). It must not be taken too seriously; the idea is right but the analysis is not very accurate. The idea has to do with the determination of the size of atoms, and the fact that, classically, the electrons would radiate light and spiral in until they settle down right on top of the nucleus. But that cannot be right quantum-mechanically because then we would know where each electron was and how fast it was moving.

Suppose we have a hydrogen atom, and measure the position of the electron; we must not be able to predict exactly where the electron will be, or the momentum spread will then turn out to be infinite. Every time we look at the electron, it is somewhere, but it has an amplitude to be in different places so there is a probability of it being found in different places. These places cannot all be at the nucleus; we shall suppose there is a spread in position of order a
. That is, the distance of the electron from the nucleus is usually about a
. We shall determine a
 by minimizing the total energy of the atom.

The spread in momentum is roughly ℏ/a
 because of the uncertainty relation, so that if we try to measure the momentum of the electron in some manner, such as by scattering x-rays off it and looking for the Doppler effect from a moving scatterer, we would expect not to get zero every time—the electron is not standing still—but the momenta must be of the order p≈ℏ/a
. Then the kinetic energy is roughly 12mv2=
 p2/2m=
 ℏ2/2ma2
. (In a sense, this is a kind of dimensional analysis to find out in what way the kinetic energy depends upon the reduced Planck constant, upon m
, and upon the size of the atom. We need not trust our answer to within factors like 2
, π
, etc. We have not even defined a
 very precisely.) Now the potential energy is minus e2
 over the distance from the center, say −e2/a
, where, as defined in Volume I, e2
 is the charge of an electron squared, divided by 4πϵ0
. Now the point is that the potential energy is reduced if a
 gets smaller, but the smaller a
 is, the higher the momentum required, because of the uncertainty principle, and therefore the higher the kinetic energy. The total energy is
E=ℏ2/2ma2−e2/a.(2.10)
We do not know what a
 is, but we know that the atom is going to arrange itself to make some kind of compromise so that the energy is as little as possible. In order to minimize E
, we differentiate with respect to a
, set the derivative equal to zero, and solve for a
. The derivative of E
 is
dE/da=−ℏ2/ma3+e2/a2,(2.11)
and setting dE/da=0
 gives for a
 the value
a0=ℏ2/me2=0.529 angstrom,=0.529×10−10 meter.(2.12)
This particular distance is called the Bohr radius, and we have thus learned that atomic dimensions are of the order of angstroms, which is right. This is pretty good—in fact, it is amazing, since until now we have had no basis for understanding the size of atoms! Atoms are completely impossible from the classical point of view, since the electrons would spiral into the nucleus.

Now if we put the value (2.12) for a0
 into (2.10) to find the energy, it comes out
E0=−e2/2a0=−me4/2ℏ2=−13.6 eV.(2.13)
What does a negative energy mean? It means that the electron has less energy when it is in the atom than when it is free. It means it is bound. It means it takes energy to kick the electron out; it takes energy of the order of 13.6
 eV to ionize a hydrogen atom. We have no reason to think that it is not two or three times this—or half of this—or (1/π)
 times this, because we have used such a sloppy argument. However, we have cheated, we have used all the constants in such a way that it happens to come out the right number! This number, 13.6
 electron volts, is called a Rydberg of energy; it is the ionization energy of hydrogen.

So we now understand why we do not fall through the floor. As we walk, our shoes with their masses of atoms push against the floor with its mass of atoms. In order to squash the atoms closer together, the electrons would be confined to a smaller space and, by the uncertainty principle, their momenta would have to be higher on the average, and that means high energy; the resistance to atomic compression is a quantum-mechanical effect and not a classical effect. Classically, we would expect that if we were to draw all the electrons and protons closer together, the energy would be reduced still further, and the best arrangement of positive and negative charges in classical physics is all on top of each other. This was well known in classical physics and was a puzzle because of the existence of the atom. Of course, the early scientists invented some ways out of the trouble—but never mind, we have the right way out, now!

Incidentally, although we have no reason to understand it at the moment, in a situation where there are many electrons it turns out that they try to keep away from each other. If one electron is occupying a certain space, then another does not occupy the same space. More precisely, there are two spin cases, so that two can sit on top of each other, one spinning one way and one the other way. But after that we cannot put any more there. We have to put others in another place, and that is the real reason that matter has strength. If we could put all the electrons in the same place, it would condense even more than it does. It is the fact that the electrons cannot all get on top of each other that makes tables and everything else solid.

Obviously, in order to understand the properties of matter, we will have to use quantum mechanics and not be satisfied with classical mechanics.

2–5Energy levels
We have talked about the atom in its lowest possible energy condition, but it turns out that the electron can do other things. It can jiggle and wiggle in a more energetic manner, and so there are many different possible motions for the atom. According to quantum mechanics, in a stationary condition there can only be definite energies for an atom. We make a diagram (Fig. 2–9) in which we plot the energy vertically, and we make a horizontal line for each allowed value of the energy. When the electron is free, i.e., when its energy is positive, it can have any energy; it can be moving at any speed. But bound energies are not arbitrary. The atom must have one or another out of a set of allowed values, such as those in Fig. 2–9.


Fig. 2–9.Energy diagram for an atom, showing several possible transitions.
Now let us call the allowed values of the energy E0
, E1
, E2
, E3
. If an atom is initially in one of these “excited states,” E1
, E2
, etc., it does not remain in that state forever. Sooner or later it drops to a lower state and radiates energy in the form of light. The frequency of the light that is emitted is determined by conservation of energy plus the quantum-mechanical understanding that the frequency of the light is related to the energy of the light by (2.1). Therefore the frequency of the light which is liberated in a transition from energy E3
 to energy E1
 (for example) is
ω31=(E3−E1)/ℏ.(2.14)
This, then, is a characteristic frequency of the atom and defines a spectral emission line. Another possible transition would be from E3
 to E0
. That would have a different frequency
ω30=(E3−E0)/ℏ.(2.15)
Another possibility is that if the atom were excited to the state E1
 it could drop to the ground state E0
, emitting a photon of frequency
ω10=(E1−E0)/ℏ.(2.16)
The reason we bring up three transitions is to point out an interesting relationship. It is easy to see from (2.14), (2.15), and (2.16) that
ω30=ω31+ω10.(2.17)
In general, if we find two spectral lines, we shall expect to find another line at the sum of the frequencies (or the difference in the frequencies), and that all the lines can be understood by finding a series of levels such that every line corresponds to the difference in energy of some pair of levels. This remarkable coincidence in spectral frequencies was noted before quantum mechanics was discovered, and it is called the Ritz combination principle. This is again a mystery from the point of view of classical mechanics. Let us not belabor the point that classical mechanics is a failure in the atomic domain; we seem to have demonstrated that pretty well.

We have already talked about quantum mechanics as being represented by amplitudes which behave like waves, with certain frequencies and wave numbers. Let us observe how it comes about from the point of view of amplitudes that the atom has definite energy states. This is something we cannot understand from what has been said so far, but we are all familiar with the fact that confined waves have definite frequencies. For instance, if sound is confined to an organ pipe, or anything like that, then there is more than one way that the sound can vibrate, but for each such way there is a definite frequency. Thus an object in which the waves are confined has certain resonance frequencies. It is therefore a property of waves in a confined space—a subject which we will discuss in detail with formulas later on—that they exist only at definite frequencies. And since the general relation exists between frequencies of the amplitude and energy, we are not surprised to find definite energies associated with electrons bound in atoms.

2–6Philosophical implications
Let us consider briefly some philosophical implications of quantum mechanics. As always, there are two aspects of the problem: one is the philosophical implication for physics, and the other is the extrapolation of philosophical matters to other fields. When philosophical ideas associated with science are dragged into another field, they are usually completely distorted. Therefore we shall confine our remarks as much as possible to physics itself.

First of all, the most interesting aspect is the idea of the uncertainty principle; making an observation affects the phenomenon. It has always been known that making observations affects a phenomenon, but the point is that the effect cannot be disregarded or minimized or decreased arbitrarily by rearranging the apparatus. When we look for a certain phenomenon we cannot help but disturb it in a certain minimum way, and the disturbance is necessary for the consistency of the viewpoint. The observer was sometimes important in prequantum physics, but only in a trivial sense. The problem has been raised: if a tree falls in a forest and there is nobody there to hear it, does it make a noise? A real tree falling in a real forest makes a sound, of course, even if nobody is there. Even if no one is present to hear it, there are other traces left. The sound will shake some leaves, and if we were careful enough we might find somewhere that some thorn had rubbed against a leaf and made a tiny scratch that could not be explained unless we assumed the leaf were vibrating. So in a certain sense we would have to admit that there is a sound made. We might ask: was there a sensation of sound? No, sensations have to do, presumably, with consciousness. And whether ants are conscious and whether there were ants in the forest, or whether the tree was conscious, we do not know. Let us leave the problem in that form.

Another thing that people have emphasized since quantum mechanics was developed is the idea that we should not speak about those things which we cannot measure. (Actually relativity theory also said this.) Unless a thing can be defined by measurement, it has no place in a theory. And since an accurate value of the momentum of a localized particle cannot be defined by measurement it therefore has no place in the theory. The idea that this is what was the matter with classical theory is a false position. It is a careless analysis of the situation. Just because we cannot measure position and momentum precisely does not a priori mean that we cannot talk about them. It only means that we need not talk about them. The situation in the sciences is this: A concept or an idea which cannot be measured or cannot be referred directly to experiment may or may not be useful. It need not exist in a theory. In other words, suppose we compare the classical theory of the world with the quantum theory of the world, and suppose that it is true experimentally that we can measure position and momentum only imprecisely. The question is whether the ideas of the exact position of a particle and the exact momentum of a particle are valid or not. The classical theory admits the ideas; the quantum theory does not. This does not in itself mean that classical physics is wrong. When the new quantum mechanics was discovered, the classical people—which included everybody except Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and Born—said: “Look, your theory is not any good because you cannot answer certain questions like: what is the exact position of a particle?, which hole does it go through?, and some others.” Heisenberg’s answer was: “I do not need to answer such questions because you cannot ask such a question experimentally.” It is that we do not have to. Consider two theories (a) and (b); (a) contains an idea that cannot be checked directly but which is used in the analysis, and the other, (b), does not contain the idea. If they disagree in their predictions, one could not claim that (b) is false because it cannot explain this idea that is in (a), because that idea is one of the things that cannot be checked directly. It is always good to know which ideas cannot be checked directly, but it is not necessary to remove them all. It is not true that we can pursue science completely by using only those concepts which are directly subject to experiment.

In quantum mechanics itself there is a probability amplitude, there is a potential, and there are many constructs that we cannot measure directly. The basis of a science is its ability to predict. To predict means to tell what will happen in an experiment that has never been done. How can we do that? By assuming that we know what is there, independent of the experiment. We must extrapolate the experiments to a region where they have not been done. We must take our concepts and extend them to places where they have not yet been checked. If we do not do that, we have no prediction. So it was perfectly sensible for the classical physicists to go happily along and suppose that the position—which obviously means something for a baseball—meant something also for an electron. It was not stupidity. It was a sensible procedure. Today we say that the law of relativity is supposed to be true at all energies, but someday somebody may come along and say how stupid we were. We do not know where we are “stupid” until we “stick our neck out,” and so the whole idea is to put our neck out. And the only way to find out that we are wrong is to find out what our predictions are. It is absolutely necessary to make constructs.

We have already made a few remarks about the indeterminacy of quantum mechanics. That is, that we are unable now to predict what will happen in physics in a given physical circumstance which is arranged as carefully as possible. If we have an atom that is in an excited state and so is going to emit a photon, we cannot say when it will emit the photon. It has a certain amplitude to emit the photon at any time, and we can predict only a probability for emission; we cannot predict the future exactly. This has given rise to all kinds of nonsense and questions on the meaning of freedom of will, and of the idea that the world is uncertain.

Of course we must emphasize that classical physics is also indeterminate, in a sense. It is usually thought that this indeterminacy, that we cannot predict the future, is an important quantum-mechanical thing, and this is said to explain the behavior of the mind, feelings of free will, etc. But if the world were classical—if the laws of mechanics were classical—it is not quite obvious that the mind would not feel more or less the same. It is true classically that if we knew the position and the velocity of every particle in the world, or in a box of gas, we could predict exactly what would happen. And therefore the classical world is deterministic. Suppose, however, that we have a finite accuracy and do not know exactly where just one atom is, say to one part in a billion. Then as it goes along it hits another atom, and because we did not know the position better than to one part in a billion, we find an even larger error in the position after the collision. And that is amplified, of course, in the next collision, so that if we start with only a tiny error it rapidly magnifies to a very great uncertainty. To give an example: if water falls over a dam, it splashes. If we stand nearby, every now and then a drop will land on our nose. This appears to be completely random, yet such a behavior would be predicted by purely classical laws. The exact position of all the drops depends upon the precise wigglings of the water before it goes over the dam. How? The tiniest irregularities are magnified in falling, so that we get complete randomness. Obviously, we cannot really predict the position of the drops unless we know the motion of the water absolutely exactly.

Speaking more precisely, given an arbitrary accuracy, no matter how precise, one can find a time long enough that we cannot make predictions valid for that long a time. Now the point is that this length of time is not very large. It is not that the time is millions of years if the accuracy is one part in a billion. The time goes, in fact, only logarithmically with the error, and it turns out that in only a very, very tiny time we lose all our information. If the accuracy is taken to be one part in billions and billions and billions—no matter how many billions we wish, provided we do stop somewhere—then we can find a time less than the time it took to state the accuracy—after which we can no longer predict what is going to happen! It is therefore not fair to say that from the apparent freedom and indeterminacy of the human mind, we should have realized that classical “deterministic” physics could not ever hope to understand it, and to welcome quantum mechanics as a release from a “completely mechanistic” universe. For already in classical mechanics there was indeterminability from a practical point of view.

